Vocabulary Define: civilization, culture, joint-stock company, immigrate,Pilgrim, proprietary colony, indenturedservant, subsistence farming, triangulartrade, hierarchy, slave code.
People and Terms Identify: Christopher Columbus, William Penn.
Places Locate: Jamestown.
Summarize why settlers came to Jamestown and Plymouth colony. Reviewing Big Ideas
What are the different ways in which early settlers in theEnglish colonies developed new and unique forms of government?
for Understanding
What role did religion play in the founding of English colonies?
How did geography influence the way theEnglish colonies developed?
Do you think the artist’sdepiction of the people and the ship isaccurate, considering that they havejust completed a long journey? Why orwhy not? CACS3; CS4 200 kilometers 0200 miles 0 Lambert Equal-Area projection N SEW 70°W40°N 30°N 60°WATLaNTIC OCEaNLakeErieLake OntarioME. (part of Mass.) N.H. MASS. R.I.CONN.N.Y. PA. N.J. DEL. MD. VA. N.C. S.C. GA.Salem Boston Plymouth Hartford New Haven New York City Charles Town SavannahJamestownPhiladelphia St. Mary's The Thirteen Colonies, 1750 Town or City New England Colonies Middle Colonies Southern Colonies
How many colonies were in New England in 1750?
Which town or city is located the farthest west? Which townor city is located the farthest east? Colony Description of FoundingWriting About History 10. Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a settler in Jamestown. Write a letterto someone back in England describingthe hardships you faced after arrivingat the colony.
Vocabulary Define: mercantilism, Enlightenment, logic, Great Awakening,customs duty, exports, committee ofcorrespondence, communicate,minuteman.
People and Terms Identify: John Locke, Stamp Act, Townshend Acts,Intolerable Acts, George Washington,Declaration of Independence.
Places Locate: Lexington, Concord, Yorktown. Reviewing Big Ideas
Which ways did the Great Awakening contribute to the independ-ent spirit of American colonists?
What effect did the Glorious Revolution have on theAmerican colonies?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are a colonist in 1767, unhappy aboutBritain’s policies toward the colonies.Write a pamphlet explaining your posi-tion and urging other colonists to sup-port resistance efforts.
Vocabulary Define: republic, frame- work, recession, popular sovereignty,federalism, separation of powers, inter-pret, checks and balances, veto, revise,amendment, ratification
People and Terms Identify: Articles of Confederation, Northwest Ordinance,Shays’s Rebellion, ConstitutionalConvention, Great Compromise, Three-Fifths Compromise, Federalists,Antifederalists.
Explain why the Antifederalists opposed the Constitution . Reviewing Big Ideas
How was the Constitution written as a flexible framework ofgovernment?
Did the Articles of Confed- eration or the Constitution provide abetter way to solve the problems facingthe nation? Explain.
The two states that had held out finally ratified the Constitution after the new government was in place.North Carolina waited until November 1789 after abill of rights had actually been proposed. RhodeIsland, still nervous about losing its independence,did not ratify the Constitution until May 1790. The United States now had a new government, but no one knew if the Constitution would work anybetter than the Articles of Confederation. Manyexpressed great confidence, however, becauseGeorge Washington had been chosen as the first pres-ident under the new Constitution. Examining Why was it important for Virginia and New York to ratify the Constitution, even afterthe required nine states had done so?Reading Check CHAPTER 1 Creating a Nation 131 Writing About History
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a Federalist or an Antifederalist at astate ratifying convention. Write aspeech in which you try to convinceyour audience to either accept or rejectthe new Constitution.
Define: conquistador, presidio, hidalgo, encomienda, hacienda, vaquero, Northwest Passage, coureur de bois.
Identify: Francisco Pizarro, Popé.
Explain how the fur trade contributed to the slow growth of New France.
Global Connections The king of Spain created a scheme to oversee his empirein America. What system did he use togovern the distant colonies?
Why did the various groups of Spaniards come to NorthAmerica?
Were the French or Spanish colonies more successful? Why?
How did theCatholic Church contribute to theSpanish settlement of the New Mexicoterritory?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are an officeholder for the French king andwant to support his policies. Write anadvertisement for a French newspaperto encourage people to settle in NewFrance.
Define: Puritan, joint-stock company, privateer, burgesses, headright,proprietary colony.
Identify: John Cabot, Walter Raleigh, Powhatan Confederacy.
Explain how tobacco saved Jamestown.
How did the enclosure movement change England’ssociety?
What caused friction in the Maryland colony?
What factors con-tributed to the growing rivalry betweenSpain and England? Ways to Attract Settlers
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of Captain John Smith of Jamestown.Write a town circular explaining to yourfellow colonists why trading with thePowhatan Confederacy is a good sur-vival strategy.
Define: Separatist, Pilgrim, heretic.
Identify: William Bradford, Squanto, John Winthrop, Massachusetts BayCompany, Great Migration, RogerWilliams, Anne Hutchinson.
Explain Why was John Winthrop con- cerned about the ideas of RogerWilliams?
How did Thomas Hooker’s beliefs promote theidea of separation of church and state?
In what ways were the causes and effects of the Pequot Warand King Philip’s War similar?
Why did the Pilgrims feel it was necessary to create their own government?
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are a Pilgrim in Plymouth Colony. Write a let-ter to your friends in Europe describingyour first few weeks in the new land.
Define: pacifism.
Identify: English Civil War, Maryland Toleration Act, Restoration, WilliamPenn, James Oglethorpe.
Global Connections After the Restoration, why did the English government openly work to promoteadditional colonization in NorthAmerica?
How did the English Civil War affect the English colonies in America?
Whatevents led to Cromwell’s rise to powerin England?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you have been hired by the proprietors ofNew Jersey to persuade settlers tocome there. Write an editorial for anewspaper in England to convince people to settle in New Jersey.
Define: cash crop, plantation, inden- tured servant, gentry, subsistence farm-ing, Middle Passage, slave code.
Identify: Eliza Lucas, William Berkeley, Royal African Company.
Explain why South Carolina began pro- ducing indigo.
How did the geography of the Chesapeake region affect its economic development?
How did the economies of the Chesapeake region and SouthCarolina differ?
How did the slave trade develop in the Americas?
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are a backcountry farmer in Virginia. Write aletter to your local newspaper describ-ing how you feel about Sir WilliamBerkeley and the policies he instituted.
Define: town meeting, selectmen, bill of exchange, triangular trade, artisan,entrepreneur, capitalist.
Identify: Grand Banks, fall line, meetinghouse.
Describe the different social classes in New England and the Middle Colonies.
How did Puritanism affect the development ofNew England society and government?
How did the geography of the New Englandand Middle Colonies contribute to theireconomic development?
Wouldthe practice of “Holy Watching” havebeen easy to do in this town? Why orwhy not?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are barrel maker in the New EnglandColonies. Write a letter to a governmentofficial stating the problems you havethat you want the government toaddress.
Define: mercantilism, natural rights.
Identify: Charles II, James II, Dominion of New England, Glorious Revolution.
Discuss how England’s Glorious Revolution influenced the Americancolonies.
How did Governor- General Andros’s attempt to weakencolonial resolve increase colonists’anger towards England?
How did the ideas of the philosopher John Lockecontribute to revolutionary ideas in theAmerican colonies?
Why do you thinkcolonial merchant shippers were angryabout the Navigation Acts?
Expository Writing Take on the role of a colonial merchant. Write a letter toa relative in England explaining howthe Navigation Acts have affected yourbusiness.
Define: Enlightenment, Great Awakening, rationalism, pietism, revival.
Identify: Cotton Mather, Pennsylvania Dutch, Stono Rebellion, John Locke,Montesquieu, Jonathan Edwards,George Whitefield.
Explain how the Enlightenment and the Great Awakening influenced theAmerican colonies.
What factors and motivations drove immigration to theAmerican colonies in the 1700s?
Comparisons In what ways did enslaved Africans develop their ownculture in the American colonies?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a German immigrant to the coloniesin 172
Write a letter to your relativesexplaining what your life in the coloniesis like and encouraging them to join youin America.
Define: customs duty, inflation, nonimportation agreement, writ of assistance.
Identify: Albany Plan of Union, French and Indian War, Treaty of Paris,Quartering Act.
What argument did the Stamp ActCongress make in protest against theBritish taxes?
Why do you think the British were so willing to pass new taxesin the face of colonial opposition?
How were the British able tomove their troops up the steep cliffsnear the city?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a member of the Sons of Liberty orthe Daughters of Liberty. Write a pam-phlet explaining what your group doesand urging colonists to join.
Define: committee of correspondence, minuteman, Loyalist, Patriot.
Identify: Boston Tea Party, Intolerable Acts, Second Continental Congress,Battle of Bunker Hill, Declaration ofIndependence.
Government and Democracy After King George III refused to consider theOlive Branch Petition, in what ways didthe Continental Congress begin to actlike an independent government?
What role did the com- mittees of correspondence play in thecolonists’ move toward independence?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you were a participant in the Boston TeaParty. Write a diary entry describing theevent.
Define: guerrilla warfare, letters of marque.
Identify: William Howe, Nathan Hale, Valley Forge, Marquis de Lafayette,Saratoga, John Paul Jones, CharlesCornwallis, Battle of Kings Mountain.
Global Connections Why were the French at first reluctant to sign analliance with the colonies?
How did European coun- tries aid the Americans in the war forindependence?
How has the artist portrayedthe condition of Washington’s army?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a colonist during the RevolutionaryWar. Write a letter to convinceEuropean nations to support theAmericans in the war.
Define: duty, recession.
Identify: Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, Northwest Ordinance,Shays’s Rebellion.
Describe the conditions that led to Shays’s Rebellion.
What do you think was the most serious flawof the Articles of Confederation? Whydo you think so?
How are the issues faced by the federal government today simi-lar to those that were faced by theConfederation Congress?
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a journalist during the time of theConfederation Congress. Write an edi-torial expressing your opinion ofShays’s Rebellion, and suggest how thegovernment might handle such situa-tions better in the future.
Define: popular sovereignty, federal- ism, separation of powers, legislativebranch, executive branch, judicialbranch, checks and balances, veto,impeach, amendment.
Identify: Virginia Plan, New Jersey Plan, Great Compromise, Three-FifthsCompromise.
Were the dele- gates to the Constitutional Conventionrepresentative of the American public?Why or why not?
Do you think the Founders were right in making the amendmentprocess difficult? Why or why not?
Why did thedelegates choose to conduct the con-vention behind closed doors?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of an observer at the ConstitutionalConvention. Write a journal entrydescribing what you witnessed.
Define: Federalist, Antifederalist.
Identify: John Hancock, Patrick Henry.
List the groups of people who opposed ratification of the Constitution.
Explain why the Federalists had an advantage over the Antifederalists.
Government and Democracy Do you think it was important for all the states toratify the Constitution? Why or why not?
How did the Federalists attempt to assure ratification of theConstitution?
Why was NewHampshire’s ratification of theConstitution important?
Define: cabinet, bond, speculator, enumerated powers, implied powers,agrarianism.
Identify: Tariff of 1789, Bank of the United States, Whiskey Rebellion.
Describe the intended purpose of the national bank.
What prece- dent did George Washington set aspresident of the United States?
Why did Hamilton think it was important to pay the national debt,the domestic debt, and the state debts?
Expository Writing Imagine you are James Madison. Write a speech explain-ing why you are against AlexanderHamilton’s financial program.
Define: most-favored nation, alien, sedition, interposition, nullification.
Identify: Jay’s Treaty, Pinckney’s Treaty, Washington’s Farewell Address,Quasi-War, Alien and Sedition Acts.
How did the Alien and Sedition Actsinterfere with the lives of people livingin the United States?
How did France and Great Britain test American neutrality?
Whydo you think the political situation ofthe 1790s led to fights among membersof Congress? 220 CHAPTER 6 Federalists and RepublicansChallenges Facing WashingtonChallenges Facing Adams The Election of 1800 Presidential Election, 1800 Jefferson Democratic RepublicanCandidate Political Party Adams Federalist Burr Democratic Republican Pinckney73Electoral Vote 65 73 64UnknownPopular Vote Unknown Unknown Unknown Federalist Jay Federalist 1 Unknown 487 21 84 3 8 4126 4 16 4 9 7 3 55KY.PA. VA. N.C. TENN. S.C. GA.N.Y.N.H. VT. MASS. R.I. CONN. N.J. DEL. MD.MD.INDIANA TERR. MISS. TERR.TERR. SOUTH OF OHIO R.TERR. N.W. OF OHIO R. *According to the Constitution, each elector in the Electoral College voted for two people in a presidential election. The person receiving the most votes became president, and the person receiving the second-highest number of votes became vice president. Under this system a tie was possible, as happened in the case of the tie between Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr in 1800. The House of Representatives then elected Jefferson after 35 rounds of voting in which there was no clear winner. To prevent such confusion in the future, the Twelfth Amendment was added to the Constitution in 180
The amendment stipulates that electoral votes for president and vice president are counted and listed separately.
Which states split their electoral votes between Jefferson and Adams?
Geography Skills Where were the Federalists strong? What policies did they favor that would accountfor their strength there? Finally, in February 1801, Jefferson let Federalist James Bayard know that if elected, Jefferson wouldnot fire all the Federalists in the government, nor dis-mantle Hamilton’s financial system. These assur-ances convinced Bayard to cast a blank ballot,ensuring that Jefferson would receive more votesthan Burr. Jefferson became the new president. The election of 1800 was an important turning point in American history. At the time, theFederalists controlled the army, the presidency, andthe Congress. They could have refused to step down and overthrown the Constitution. Instead,they respected the people’s right to choose the pres-ident. The election of 1800 demonstrated thatpower in the United States could be peacefullytransferred despite strong disagreements betweenthe parties. Analyzing What was the purpose of the Alien and Sedition Acts?Reading Check
Expository Writing Write an editorial that responds to George Washington’sFarewell Address.
Define: judicial review, impressment, embargo.
Identify: John Marshall, Louisiana Purchase, Meriwether Lewis, WilliamClark, Sacagawea, Zebulon Pike.
How did the Supreme Court decision in Marbury v. Madison strengthen the federal judiciary?
How was Jefferson’s presidency similar to anddifferent from those of Washington andAdams in political style, goals, and for-eign policy?
Why doyou think Pierre L’Enfant designed thecity with wide avenues and circularintersections?
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are a member of the Zebulon Pike expeditionin the Colorado territory. Write a jour-nal entry describing what you haveseen on the trip.
Define: War Hawks, nationalism.
Identify: Non-Intercourse Act, Tecumseh, William Henry Harrison,Oliver Perry, Hartford Convention,Treaty of Ghent.
Analyze why Perry’s victory on Lake Erie was important for the Americans.
What did Tecumseh’s death signify for NativeAmericans of the Northwest Territory?
How did the War of 1812 affect the United States?
Descriptive Writing Think of an event that made you feel patriotic about theUnited States. Write a paragraphexplaining why the event made you feelthis way.
Define: revenue tariff, protective tariff.
Identify: Era of Good Feelings, John C. Calhoun, John Marshall, Kinache,Adam-Onís Treaty, Quadruple Alliance.
Summarize how the Supreme Court rulings in McCulloch v.Maryland and Gibbons v.Ogden strengthened the federal government.
How did the Monroe Doctrine reinforce PresidentWashington’s foreign policy goals?
How did nationalism affect the foreign affairs of the United States?
What elements ofthis picture indicate that he was veryaccustomed to European culture?
Expository Writing Imagine you are an editor of a newspaper in Spanish-held Florida. Write an editorial in whichyou either attack or defend the actionsof Andrew Jackson and his militia inseizing Spanish settlements in Florida.
Define: interchangeable parts, labor union, strike.
Identify: National Road, Robert Fulton, Industrial Revolution, Francis C. Lowell,Eli Whitney, Samuel F.B. Morse .
List the changes that occurred as a result of the Industrial Revolution.
Describe advances that were made in transportation during this period.
How did the concept of interchangeable parts revo-lutionize the manufacturing process?
Why did early labor unions have little success?
Why weresteamboats so much more efficientthan other shipping methods of thetime?
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are a teenager working in a textile factory inthe early 1800s. Write a letter to yourfamily describing your way of life as afactory worker.
Define: cotton gin, planter, yeoman farmer, slave code.
Identify: task system, gang system, driver, Frederick Douglass, DenmarkVesey, Nat Turner.
Explain why industry lagged in the South compared to the North.
How did cot- ton farming change the South? Whataspects of Southern life stayed thesame?
Why was song an impor- tant part of the enslaved AfricanAmerican culture?
Expository Writing Imagine you are a European visitor to the South in 1830.Write a letter home explaining yourimpressions of life in this part of thenation.
Define: ”favorite son,” “corrupt bar- gain,” mudslinging.
Identify: Missouri Compromise, Henry Clay, William Crawford, AmericanSystem, Democratic-Republican.
Compare the different campaign strate- gies of the candidates in the 1824 election.
Groups and Institutions Why was the Democratic-Republican Party formedafter the election of 1824?
Why do you think the candidates in the 1828 election focusedon mudslinging instead of issues?
What characteris-tics of Adams shown in the image giveclues as to the kind of person he was?
Expository Writing Imagine you are a voter in the election of 182
Write aletter to a family member explainingwhich presidential candidate you willvote for and why.
Define: spoils system, caucus system, secede, nullification.
Identify: Tariff of Abominations, John C. Calhoun, Daniel Webster, Force Bill,Indian Removal Act, Trail of Tears, Panicof 183
Groups and Institutions In what ways did the United States become moredemocratic during Jackson’s presidency?
What effect did the Panic of 1837 have on thepresidential election of 1840?
Some wealthy Americansclaimed that President Jackson’s support-ers were a “mob” element in the nation.How does the artist portray Jackson’ssupporters? Why do you think so?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are a Native American living in the UnitedStates during Andrew Jackson’s presi-dency. Write a letter to PresidentJackson giving your opinion of theIndian Removal Act.
Define: nativism, romanticism, transcendentalism, utopia.
Identify: Know-Nothings, Second Great Awakening, Charles Grandison Finney,Joseph Smith.
Summarize the goals of the Know- Nothings.
What reli- gious denominations increased theirinfluence in the United States duringthe Second Great Awakening?
How did the writers of the early to mid-1800s reflect Americanlife?
Expository Writing Imagine you are an Irish or German immigrant in themid-1800s. Write an essay contrastingthe United States with your homeland.
Define: benevolent society, temper- ance, penitentiary.
Identify: Dorothea Dix, Lyman Beecher, Horace Mann, Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
State the main goal of the early women’s movement.
How did the Second Great Awakening affect thereform movements of the mid-1800s?
In what ways did the new penitentiaries change the prison system?
Expository Writing Think of reforms you believe are needed today in theUnited States. Write a letter to yourlegislator expressing why you believethe reforms are needed.
Define: gradualism, abolition, emancipation.
Identify: American Colonization Society, William Lloyd Garrison,American Antislavery Society, FrederickDouglass.
Describe how free African Americans worked to end slavery.
Which individuals helped build support for abolition, andwhat did they do to win that support?
Why is William Lloyd Garrison’s publication of the Liberator considered a turning point in the aboli-tionist movement?
In which states did the per-centage of African American populationdecrease by at least 5 percent between1820 and 1860?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are working for the Liberator in the 1830s. Write a letter to a friend describ-ing what you hope to accomplish as amember of the staff of an abolitionistnewspaper.
Define: Manifest Destiny, squatter, overlander.
Identify: John Louis O’Sullivan, Jethro Wood, John Deere, Cyrus McCormick,John Sutter, Kit Carson, Jim Bridger,Donner Party, Brigham Young.
Evaluate how mountain men helped settle the West.
What two inventions made it easier to farm thefrontier?
How did the United States settle its land disputes with GreatBritain and the Plains Indians?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you emigrated from the East and are livingon a frontier farm in the West. Write aletter to a friend in the East describingyour daily life.
Define: Tejano, empresario, annexation.
Identify: National Colonization Act, Washington-on-the Brazos, AntonioLópez de Santa Anna, Sam Houston,Alamo, William B. Travis.
Explain why Texas declared war on Mexico.
Groups and Institutions Why did some Northern leaders oppose admit-ting Texas to the United States?
How did the Texan defeats at the Alamo and Goliad affectTexans?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are living in Texas in the late 1830s.Write a letter to the U.
Define: envoy, cede.
Identify: John Tyler, James K. Polk, “Fifty-four Forty or Fight,” ZacharyTaylor, John C. Frémont, Bear FlagRepublic, Winfield Scott, Treaty ofGuadalupe Hidalgo.
Summarize the controversy between Mexico and the United States overTexas.
Continuity and Change The idea of Manifest Destiny was realized as aresult of the war with Mexico. Whatnew problems did this increase in landcause for the United States?
What was the military strategy of the United States during thewar with Mexico? Evaluate the successof this strategy.
What symbols of progressare shown trailing the spirit figureheading westward?
Expository Writing Pretend you are James K. Polk, the Democratic candi-date for president in the 1844 election.Write a speech in which you explainyour platform.
Define: popular sovereignty, secession.
Identify: Wilmot Proviso, Lewis Cass, Conscience Whigs, Cotton Whigs,Free-Soil Party, “Forty-Niners.”
Summarize how Americans responded to the idea of popular sovereignty.
How did the war with Mexico and the Gold Rushaffect the slavery issue in the UnitedStates?
Why did Zachary Taylor win the election of 1848?
What elements of thepainting suggest the seriousness of theslavery issue being debated?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are Henry Clay. Write a speech to presentto the Senate.
Define: Underground Railroad, transcontinental railroad.
Identify: Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Fugitive Slave Act, Harriet Tubman, GadsdenPurchase, Kansas-Nebraska Act, CharlesSumner.
Explain how the transcontinental rail- road intensified the slavery issue.
How did antislavery activists justify disobeying the Fugitive Slave Act?
What events led to “Bleeding Kansas”?
Expository Writing Imagine you are a reporter for a Southern or Northernnewspaper in the 1850s. Write an article on public reaction to Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
Define: referendum, insurrection.
Identify: Republican Party, Know- Nothings, Dred Scott, Lecompton constitution, Freeport Doctrine.
List the two rulings in Dred Scott v. Sandford that increased sectional divisiveness.
What were the main goals of the Republican andAmerican Parties?
How did Americans react to John Brown’s raid?
Did any parties besides theRepublican and Democratic survive after1865? How does this support the ideathat the 1850s and 1860s were animportant transition era in the nation’shistory?
Expository Writing Imagine you have just read the Supreme Court’s ruling in the Dred Scott case. Write a letter to the editor explaining your reaction to the decision.
Define: Confederacy, martial law.
Identify: John C. Breckinridge, John Bell, Crittenden’s Compromise,Jefferson Davis.
List two provisions of Crittenden’s Compromise.
How did Lincoln prevent Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland from seceding?Was Lincoln justified in his actions?Why or why not?
Why did Virginia’s seces- sion surprise Northerners?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are an adviser to President Lincoln, andyou have just heard about the firing onFort Sumter. Write a brief report forthe president, advising him on whatsteps to take next.
Define: greenback, conscription, habeas corpus, attrition.
Identify: Robert E. Lee, Copperheads, James Mason, John Slidell, Trent Affair, Anaconda Plan.
Explain why the South had difficulty getting supplies from foreign nations.
How did a belief in states’ rights hamper the Southduring the war?
Why did the North have an economic advantage over the South?
Why did the South resort to using paper money during the war?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are living in one of the border states atthe beginning of the Civil War. Write aletter to a relative explaining why youare planning on joining either theUnion or Confederate army.
Define: bounty, blockade runner.
Identify: “Stonewall” Jackson, Irwin McDowell, David G. Farragut, Ulysses S.Grant, George B. McClellan,Emancipation Proclamation.
Summarize why David G. Farragut was considered a hero in the North.
Geography and History Why was seizing control of the Mississippi Riveran important strategy of the Unionnavy?
an Opinion Do you think the draft for military service during the CivilWar violated civil liberties, or was theneed for defense more important?Explain your answer.
What made these vessels superior to regular warshipsused by the Union and theConfederacy?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are asked to advise President Lincolnabout issuing the EmancipationProclamation. Write a short paper inwhich you explain the reasons for theadvice you give him.
Define: hardtack.
Identify: 54th Massachusetts, Elizabeth Blackwell, United States SanitaryCommission, Clara Barton, Henry Wirz.
State the two factors that contributed to a food shortage in the South during theCivil War.
How did the Emancipation Proclamation affectAfrican Americans in the military?
In what ways do you think the Civil War changed people’s opinionsabout women’s capabilities?
Why did infections spreadso easily in hospitals, resulting innumerous deaths?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a nurse on one of the battle-fields during the Civil War. Write a journal entry describing the conditionsof the soldiers and your reaction to the situation.
Define: forage, siege.
Identify: Benjamin Grierson, Ambrose Burnside, Joseph Hooker, GeorgeMeade, Pickett’s Charge, WilliamTecumseh Sherman.
Explain why the Union victory at Gettysburg was so important.
Geography and History Why was cap- turing Vicksburg important for theUnion?
What do you think might have been the outcome of the war if theConfederates had won the Battle ofGettysburg? Why do you think so?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a Confederate soldier at the Battle ofGettysburg. Write a journal entrydescribing the battle and your feelingsabout the result of the battle.
Define: pillage, mandate.
Identify: Philip Sheridan, “Sherman neckties,” March to the Sea, ThirteenthAmendment, Appomattox Courthouse,John Wilkes Booth.
Describe how General Grant conducted the Confederate surrender.
How did Northern military strategy change after GeneralUlysses S. Grant took command of theUnion army?
What was the effect of Farragut’s blockade of Mobile Bay?
What wouldaccount for the thousands of non-battledeaths listed in one of the charts?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a reporter living in Georgia duringGeneral Sherman’s March to the Sea.Write a brief article describing theUnion’s actions and their effects on thepeople living there.
Define: Reconstruction, amnesty, pocket veto, freedmen.
Identify: Thaddeus Stevens, Radical Republicans, Wade-Davis Bill,Freedmen’s Bureau.
Explain why the efforts to provide African Americans with their own landfailed.
What services did the Freedmen’s Bureau provide toSouthern refugees and to newly freedpeople?
What are the benefits of a compromise such as the Wade-DavisBill to a government? What are thedrawbacks?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a Southerner after the Civil War.Write a journal entry describing thepostwar South and what you hope thefuture will hold for the South.
Define: black codes, impeach.
Identify: Civil Rights Act, Fourteenth Amendment, Military Reconstruction Act, Tenure of Office Act.
Evaluate why the congressional elec- tion of 1866 was significant to the Radical Republicans.
What actions by the Radical Republicans were intended to protect the civil rights of African Americans?
Do you think Presidents Lincoln and Johnson were wise in not seeking harsh treatment of the Southern states? Why or why not?
Then list the Confederate states that were readmitted to the Union in 1868, the earliest year for any such state to gain readmission. As provided in the Constitution, the Senate then put the president on trial. If two-thirds of the senators found the president guilty, he would be removed from office. For more than two months the Senate debated the president’s fate. On May 16, 1868, the Senate voted 35 to 19 that Johnson was guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors—just one vote short of what was needed for conviction. Seven Republican senators joined with the Democrats in refusing to con- vict Johnson. These senators believed that it would set a dangerous precedent to impeach a president simply because he did not agree with congressional policies. The Election of 1868 Although Johnson remained in office, the impeachment stripped him of what little power he had left. Demoralized, he finished his term quietly and did not run for election in 186
The logi- cal candidate for the Republicans was General Grant, the most popular war hero in the North. In 1868 the Republican convention unanimously nominated Grant to run for president. During the campaign, ongoing violence in the South convinced many Northern voters that the South could not be trusted to reorganize its state gov- ernments without military supervision. At the same time, the presence of Union troops in the South enabled African Americans to vote in large numbers. As a result, Grant won six Southern states and most of the Northern states. The Republicans retained large majorities in both houses of Congress. The Fifteenth Amendment With their majority securely established and a trusted president in office, congressional Republicans moved rapidly to continue Expanding the Nation An important diplomatic achievement during President Andrew Johnson’s administration was the purchase of Alaska in 186
Secretary of State William H. Seward orchestrated the deal, buying the vast expanse of wilderness from Russia for $7.2 million. Initially, the public ridiculed the purchase. Critics labeled the newly acquired territory “Seward’s Icebox.” Eventually, Americans recognized the value of the region, which turned out to be rich in such resources as oil and gold. I. Johnson Takes Office A. B. C. II. A. B. C.
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a citizen during Andrew Johnson’s administration. Write a letter to a mem- ber of Congress urging him to vote either for or against Johnson’s impeach- ment.
Define: carpetbagger, scalawag, graft.
Identify: Joseph Rainey, Hiram Revels, Ku Klux Klan Act.
Describe how some white Southerners reacted to the Republican Party gainingpower in the South.
How did the establishment of schools, churches, andsocial organizations benefit AfricanAmericans during Reconstruction?
Why did white Southerners resent both carpetbaggers andscalawags?
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are living in the postwar South. You areeither a Northerner who has recentlymoved there or a longtime Southernresident. Write a friend and describeSouthern life as you see it.
Define: “sin tax,” tenant farmer, share- cropper, furnishing merchant, crop lien,debt peonage.
Identify: Horace Greeley, “Whiskey Ring,” Panic of 1873, Compromise of187
What factors con- tributed to improving the economy ofthe South after Reconstruction?
How did the disputed elec- tion of 1876 affect Reconstructionpolicy?
Whatdetails did the artist include in thispainting to suggest dynamic activity?
Expository Writing Write a short essay explaining what you consider tobe the three most important events ofthe Reconstruction period.
Define: placer mining, quartz mining, open range, long drive, maverick.
Identify: Henry Comstock, vigilance committee, Chisholm Trail, barbed wire.
List the factors that contributed to the rise of the cattle industry.
Explain how cattle ranching shifted from open range to an organized busi-ness operation.
What two develop- ments in the late 1800s led to thedecline of the cattle business?
How did the mining indus- try contribute to the development of theWest?
Descriptive Writing Write a summary for a story line for a Hollywood movie.
Define: homestead, dry farming, sodbuster, bonanza farm.
Identify: Great Plains, Stephen Long, Homestead Act, Wheat Belt.
Explain why the Great Plains was not suitable for homesteading.
How did the need for new farming techniques onthe Great Plains result in technologicalinnovations in agriculture?
What factors contributed to the making of the Wheat Belt in theGreat Plains and then to troubled timesfor wheat farmers in the 1890s?
Persuasive Writing Write an adver- tisement persuading people from theEast and from Europe to establishhomesteads in the Great Plains.
Define: nomad, annuity, assimilate, allotment.
Identify: Little Crow, Indian Peace Commission, George A. Custer, GhostDance, Dawes Act.
Analyze how Native Americans responded to land lost due to white settlement of the Great Plains.
How did Chief Joseph resist the government’s attemptsto move the Nez Perce to reservations?
Why do you think the gov- ernment’s policy of assimilation ofNative Americans was a failure?
Then, from the point of view of ahistorian, explain the actions takenagainst Native Americans within thehistorical context of the time. Reasons for Failure
Descriptive Writing Assume the role of a Plains Indian affected by the assimilation policy of the Dawes Act.Write a journal entry describing howyou feel about the policy and how it hasaffected your life.
Define: corporation, economies of scale, fixed costs, operating costs, pool, vertical integration, horizontalintegration, monopoly, trust, holdingcompany.
Identify: stockholder, stock, Andrew Carnegie, Bessemer process.
List the new methods of advertising and selling that helped push consumergoods in the late 1800s.
What factors allowed corporations to develop in theUnited States in the late 1800s?
an Opinion Do you think an individual today can rise from “rags toriches” like Andrew Carnegie did? Whyor why not?
Huge amounts of thecapital required for the nation’s industrialization afterthe Civil War passed through the New York StockExchange. As stock trading grew, investors across the nation needed financial news. In 1882 Henry Charles Dowand Edward D. Jones founded Dow Jones & Company.This new company sent bulletins on theday’s business to Wall Street’s financialhouses. The day’s last deliverycontained a news sheet,which became the Wall Street Journal in July 188
Expository Writing Write a newspa- per editorial in which you explain whyentrepreneurs such as John D.
Define: deflation, trade union, industrial union, lockout, Marxism,arbitration, closed shop.
Identify: blacklist, Knights of Labor, injunction.
List the groups of workers represented by the Knights of Labor and theAmerican Federation of Labor.
What political contribution did Mary Harris “Mother”Jones make to American society?
Why did early labor unions fail?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are an American worker living in one ofthe nation’s large cities. Write a letter toa friend explaining why you support oroppose the work of labor unions.
Define: steerage, nativism.
Identify: Ellis Island, Jacob Riis, Angel Island, Chinese Exclusion Act.
Describe where most immigrants to the United States settled in the late 1800s.
Explain why nativist organizations opposed foreign immigrants.
What routes did European and Asian immigrantstake to get to the United States?
Why did some Americans blame immigrants for the nation’s problems?
Complete a graphic organ- izer by listing reasons nativists opposedimmigration to the United States.
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are an immigrant who arrived in the1800s. Write a letter to a relative inyour home country describing yourfeelings during processing at either EllisIsland or Angel Island.
Define: skyscraper, tenement, political machine, party boss, graft.
Identify: Louis Sullivan, George Plunkitt, William M. “Boss” Tweed.
Explain what two technologies made the building of skyscrapers possible inthe late 1800s.
How did political machines respond to theneeds of the people?
Compare the conditions under which the wealthy class, the middle class, and the working classlived in the United States in the late1800s.
Other cities’ machines controlled all the city serv- ices, including the police department. For example,St. Louis’s boss never feared arrest when he calledout to his supporters at the police-supervised votingbooth, “Are there any more repeaters out here thatwant to vote again?” Based in Kansas City, Missouri,the Pendergast brothers, James and Thomas, ran stateand city politics from the 1890s until the 1930s. Opponents of political machines, such as political cartoonist Thomas Nast, blasted bosses for their cor-ruption. Defenders, though, argued that machinesprovided necessary services and helped to assimilatethe masses of new city dwellers. Evaluating Why did political machines help city dwellers in the late 1800s?Reading Check FCAT LA.B.1.4.2
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of an urban planner in a major city inthe late 1800s. Write a letter to mem-bers of the city government listingspecific reasons for the importance ofsetting aside city land for a park andrecreational area.
Define: philanthropy, realism, vaudeville, ragtime.
Identify: Gilded Age, Social Darwinism, Gospel of Wealth, Scott Joplin.
Describe how changes in art and literature reflected the issues andcharacteristics of the late nineteenthcentury.
What were the defining characteristics of the GildedAge?
Do you think the idea of the Gospel of Wealth is still alive today?Why or why not?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a newspaper editor in the late 1800s.Write an editorial in which you supportor oppose the philosophy of SocialDarwinism.
Define: naturalism, settlement house, Americanization.
Identify: Henry George, Lester Frank Ward, Edward Bellamy, Jane Addams.
Describe the way naturalist writers por- trayed the fictional characters in theirnovels.
How did the efforts of Jane Addams and Mary Brewsterhelp poor people in urban areas in thelate 1800s?
What role do you think the government should play in the econ-omy? Give reasons to support youropinion.
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of an immigrant in the late 1800s. Writea diary entry in which you describeyour feelings about your childrenbecoming Americanized while attendingthe local public school.
Define: patronage, rebate.
Identify: Stalwart, Halfbreed, Interstate Commerce Commission.
Explain how the Pendleton Act created civil service reform.
Describe the events leading to the establishment of the InterstateCommerce Commission.
What groups and regions were strongholds forRepublicans and Democrats in the1880s? Where is their support today?
Why was the Sherman Antitrust Act ineffective?
What similari-ties do you see between Cleveland’sinauguration ceremony and the oneswe have today? Do you see any differ-ences between the ceremonies thenand now?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are seeking a federal job in the early1880s. Write a letter to your congres-sional representatives urging them tosupport or oppose the Pendleton Act.
Define: sharecropper, poll tax, grand- father clause, segregation, Jim Crowlaws, lynching.
Identify: Ida B. Wells, W.E.B. Du Bois.
Explain what happened to Ida B. Wells after she began campaigning againstlynching.
Individual Action Why did Homer Plessy challenge a Louisiana law in1892, and what was the significance ofhis action?
After Reconstruction, why did many African Americans in theSouth live in conditions that were littlebetter than slavery?
Pose questions about thephotograph to your classmates in a quiz and then have them answer thequestions.
Expository Writing Imagine that you are living in the 1890s. Write a letter tothe editor of the local newspaperexplaining your view of the SupremeCourt ruling in Plessy v.
Define: imperialism, protectorate.
Identify: Anglo-Saxonism, Matthew C. Perry, Queen Liliuokalani, Pan-Americanism, Alfred T. Mahan, Henry Cabot Lodge.
Explain why Secretary of State James G. Blaine convened the Pan-Americanconference in 188
What events in the world convinced Americans to support a large navy?
an Opinion Do you think the United States should have supportedthe planters in their attempt to over-throw Queen Liliuokalani of Hawaii?Why or why not?
How is the U.S. Navy por-trayed in relation to the Japanese resi-dents of Yokohama? Do you think theartist shows any bias in this representa-tion? Why or why not?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are living in the United States in the1890s. Write a letter to the presidentpersuading him to support or opposean imperialist policy for the UnitedStates.
Define: yellow journalism, jingoism.
Identify: José Martí, William Randolph Hearst, Joseph Pulitzer, TheodoreRoosevelt, Platt Amendment.
Explain why many Americans blamed Spain for the explosion of the U.S.S.Maine.
Government and Democracy Why did many Filipinos feel betrayed by the U.S.government after the Spanish-AmericanWar?
Do you think President McKinley could have taken a differentcourse of action with Spain over Cuba?If so, what kind? If not, why not?
what you havelearned about the Rough Riders andthis battle, what is inaccurate about thepainting? What kind of bias does thismisrepresentation show?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a Filipino living during the time ofthe U.S. annexation of the PhilippineIslands. Write a journal entry in whichyou describe your feelings about U.
Define: progressivism, muckraker, commission plan, direct primary, initiative, referendum, recall, suffrage,temperance, prohibition, socialism.
Identify: Jacob Riis, Robert La Follette, Alice Paul.
State what was provided for by the Nineteenth Amendment to theConstitution.
How did initiative, referendum, and recallchange democracy in the United States?
What impact did Susan B. Anthony have on Progressive erareforms?
Under which system dovoters seem to have the most controlover department heads? Why do youthink so? Problems Exposed by Muckrakers
Persuasive Writing Some women in the early 1900s suggested that theConstitution needed an equal rightsamendment. Imagine you are livingthen. Write a letter to the editor of yourlocal paper supporting or opposing suchan amendment.
Define: Square Deal, arbitration.
Identify: Northern Securities, United Mine Workers, Hepburn Act, UptonSinclair.
Explain what was provided for in the Hepburn Act.
How did Upton Sinclair contribute to involving the federal government in protecting consumers?
What impact did Roosevelt’s use of the ShermanAntitrust Act have on business?
Why are thegiants depicted as they are? What dothey represent? Roosevelt is called Jackthe Giant-Killer. What fairy tale is beingreferred to? Results of 1902 Coal Strike federal funds from public land sales to pay for irriga- tion and land development projects. Thus it was thefederal government that began the large-scale trans-formation of the West’s landscape and economy. Gifford Pinchot Roosevelt also backed efforts to save the nation’s forests through careful managementof the timber resources of the West. He appointed hisclose friend Gifford Pinchot to head the United StatesForest Service. “The natural resources,” Pinchot said,“must be developed and preserved for the benefit ofthe many and not merely for the profit of a few.” As progressives, Roosevelt and Pinchot both believed that trained experts in forestry and resourcemanagement should apply the same scientific stan-dards to the landscape that others were applying tothe management of cities and industry. They rejectedthe laissez-faire argument that the best way to pre-serve public land was to sell it to lumber companies,who would then carefully conserve it because it wasthe source of their profits. With the president’s sup-port, Pinchot’s department drew up regulations con-trolling lumbering on federal lands. Roosevelt took other steps as well to conserve the nation’s resources. He added over 100 million acresto the protected national forests, quadrupling theirarea, and established 5 new national parks and 51federal wildlife reservations. Roosevelt’s Legacy President Roosevelt changed the role of the federal government and the nature ofthe presidency. Increasingly, Americans began tolook to the federal government to solve the nation’seconomic and social problems. Under Roosevelt, theexecutive branch of government had dramatically increased its power. The ICC could set rates, theAgriculture Department could inspect food, theBureau of Corporations could monitor business, andthe attorney general could rapidly bring antitrustlawsuits under the Expedition Act. Examining How did Roosevelt’s policies help the conservation of natural resources?Reading Check Crowd Pleaser Teddy Roosevelt’s energetic speaking style captivated audiences across the nation. What impact did he have on the office of the presidency?History
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are living in the early 1900s and have justread Sinclair’s The Jungle. Write a letter to a friend explaining what the novel isabout and how it characterizes theProgressive era.
Define: syndicate, insubordination.
Identify: Joseph G. Cannon, Payne- Aldrich Tariff, Richard Ballinger.
Describe how Taft helped conservation efforts, alleviated child labor problems,and strengthened the ICC.
How did replacing Roosevelt’s secretary of theinterior cause a dispute between Taftand the progressives?
What was the difference between Roosevelt and Taft regardingthe relationship between the presidentand Congress?
Note the for-mal attire of the president and his wife.How would you compare the clothesthe people in the photograph are wear-ing with today’s style of dress forleisure activities?
Descriptive Writing Write a magazine article in which you defend or criticizePresident Taft’s administration in termsof its support of progressivism.
Define: income tax, unfair trade practices.
Identify: Progressive Party, New Nationalism, New Freedom, FederalReserve Act, Federal Trade Commission,National Association for theAdvancement of Colored People.
Explain why President Wilson proposed the establishment of the FederalReserve System.
What new federal agencies increased the government’s power to regulate theeconomy?
Which of Wilson’s reforms do you consider mostimportant? Why?
Expository Writing Imagine that you are a newspaper editor during PresidentWilson’s administration. Write an articleon the shortcomings of the Progressivemovement in terms of its attitudes aboutrace.
Define: guerrilla, nationalism, self-determination, propaganda, contraband, U-boat.
Identify: Pancho Villa, Franz Ferdinand, Allies, Central Powers, Sussex Pledge,Zimmermann telegram.
Name the two alliances that Europe was divided into at the start of World War I.
Continuity and Change Why did most of President Wilson’s cabinet memberssupport the British?
How did European nationalism contribute to the outbreakof World War I?
How does theorder in which countries declared warreflect the European alliance system?
Expository Writing Imagine that you are a Mexican citizen living in Mexicobetween 1914 and 191
Write a scriptfor a radio newscast in which youexpress your feelings about Americanactions in Mexico.
Define: conscription, victory garden, espionage.
Identify: War Industries Board, Bernard Baruch, Liberty Bond, Victory Bond,Committee on Public Information.
Describe the contributions of African Americans during the war.
How did government efforts to ensure supportfor the war conflict with democraticideals?
How did World War I cause the federal government to change itsrelationship with the business world?
How do theseimages encourage support for the war?How effective do you think they wouldbe today?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are working for the Committee onPublic Information. Write text for anadvertisement or lyrics to a song inwhich you attempt to sway public opin-ion in favor of the war.
Define: convoy, armistice, reparations.
Identify: “no man’s land,” Vladimir Lenin, Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, FourteenPoints, League of Nations, Treaty ofVersailles.
List the four nations that dominated the Paris peace conference in 191
Individual Action Why did President Wilson propose his Fourteen Points?
What impact did John J. Pershing and the Battle of the ArgonneForest have on World War I?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are an American soldier fighting inEurope during World War I. Write a let-ter home describing your situation andhow you feel about fighting there.
Define: cost of living, general strike, deport.
Identify: Red Scare, A. Mitchell Palmer, J. Edgar Hoover.
Describe the conditions that African Americans faced after the end of WorldWar I.
Continuity and Change Why did Republican Warren G. Harding win theelection of 1920?
How did the Palmer raids deprive some citizens of their civilrights?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a European immigrant working in a factory in the United States in 1919.Write a letter to a relative in Europedescribing the feelings of Americanstoward you and other immigrants.
Define: anarchist, eugenics, flapper, evolution, creationism, police powers,speakeasy.
Identify: Ku Klux Klan, Emergency Quota Act, Fundamentalism.
Explain why the Eighteenth Amendment was repealed.
How did the passage of the Eighteenth Amendmentand the Volstead Act change the federalgovernment’s role?
Why were immigrants from Mexico not included in the quotasystem set by the immigration acts?
Persuasive Writing Imagine it is the 1920s. Write a letter to your senator topersuade him or her to either continueto support Prohibition or to work for itsrepeal.
Define: Bohemian, mass media.
Identify: Carl Sandburg, Eugene O’Neill, Ernest Hemingway, F. ScottFitzgerald.
Describe the main themes of artists and writers during the 1920s.
How did writ- ers, artists, and popular culture of the1920s affect traditional ideas in theUnited States?
How did World War I influence the literature written duringthe 1920s?
How do different elements of this piece work to convey a sense of isolation?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you have moved to New York’s GreenwichVillage in the 1920s. Write a letter to afriend describing the atmosphere inyour neighborhood.
Define: jazz, blues.
Identify: Great Migration, Harlem Renaissance, Claude McKay, LangstonHughes, Cotton Club, Marcus Garvey.
Explain how Bessie Smith’s blues music conveyed universal themes.
Explain the importance of the defeat of Judge John Parker’s nomination to theU.S. Supreme Court.
Describe the goals of Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro ImprovementAssociation.
What actions did the NAACP take to expand politicalrights for African Americans?
How did the Great Migration affect the political power ofAfrican Americans in the North?
How did Duke Ellington create a new musical style that grewout of the ragtime tradition?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you witnessed the African American men ofthe Fifteenth Regiment of New York’sNational Guard, who had come backfrom the war, march throughManhattan and home to Harlem. Writea paragraph describing your feelingsupon seeing these men.
Define: normalcy, immunity.
Identify: Ohio Gang, Albert B. Fall, Teapot Dome scandal, Robert M. La Follette.
Evaluate the effects of the Teapot Dome scandal on citizens’ views of thefederal government.
How did the Ohio Gang tarnish the HardingAdministration?
How did the Democrats lose the chance for victory in the elec-tion of 1924?
Expository Writing Imagine you are a newspaper reporter during PresidentHarding’s term. Write an articlebreaking the news of the Teapot Domescandal.
Define: mass production, assembly line, welfare capitalism, open shop.
Identify: Model T, Charles Lindbergh, National Broadcasting Company,Columbia Broadcasting System.
Summarize the factors that led to the new consumer society in the UnitedStates during the 1920s.
How did the automobile impact American society?
How did the United States government help spurthe growth of the airline industry?
Howdid the growing consumer cultureimpact the nation’s economy?
Expository Writing Write an article for a contemporary newspaper analyzingthe impact of Charles Lindbergh’stransatlantic flight on the developmentof aviation in the United States and theworld.
Define: supply-side economics, cooper- ative individualism, isolationism, moratorium.
Identify: Charles G. Dawes, Charles Evans Hughes, Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Economic Factors Why did Andrew Mellon work to reduce federal taxrates?
What efforts did the United States make to promote permanentpeace and worldwide economic recov-ery? Were these efforts successful?Explain your answer.
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are an American business owner or farmerin the 1920s. Write a letter to your rep-resentatives in Congress explaining whyyou think cutting tax rates is a good orbad idea.
Define: stock market, bull market, margin, margin call, speculation,installment.
Identify: Alfred E. Smith, Black Tuesday, Hawley-Smoot Tariff.
Explain the significance of the year 192
How did the prac- tices of buying on margin and specula-tion cause the stock market to rise?
Cause and Effect Why did the stock market crash cause banksto fail?
Note that decreaseddemand for automobiles ultimately ledto layoffs. These layoffs furtherdecreased the demand for automobiles.What do you think might have endedthis cycle?
Expository Writing Write an article for a financial magazine explaining therapid decline of the stock market in 1929 and the reasons for the BlackTuesday crash.
Define: bailiff, shantytown, Hooverville, hobo, Dust Bowl, soap opera.
Identify: Walt Disney, Grant Wood, John Steinbeck, William Faulkner.
Explain what caused the Dust Bowl conditions on the Great Plains.
Culture and Traditions In what ways did people seek to forget about theDepression?
Inferences Why do you think Lifemagazine was so popular during the 1930s?
Think of threeadjectives that you would use todescribe the people in the photograph.Using these adjectives, write a para-graph describing the family pictured.
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are living during the Great Depression.Write a journal entry describing a dayin your life.
Define: public works, relief, foreclose.
Identify: Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Bonus Army.
Summarize three major initiatives taken by Hoover to improve the economy and the results of each.
What did business leaders promise Hoover theywould do to help the economy? Didthey keep their promises?
How did President Hoover’s philosophy of governmentguide his response to the Depression?
The farmersshown would rather dump their milkthan sell it. What did they hope toachieve by their actions?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a veteran of World War I. Write aletter to members of Congress explain-ing your circumstances and askingthem to give you your bonus early.
Define: gold standard.
Identify: New Deal, polio, bank holiday.
Describe the ways in which early influences and experiences shapedRoosevelt as a politician.
Individual Action Why did Roosevelt’s election lead to an increase in bankruns?
How did FDR’s experiences as governor of New York prepare himfor the presidency?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are living during the Depression. In yourhometown, there has been a bank run.Write a letter to the president describ-ing this event.
Define: deficit spending, binding arbitration, sit-down strike, SocialSecurity Act.
Identify: American Liberty League, Works Progress Administration,National Labor Relations Board.
Contrast the ideas of Father Charles Coughlin, Senator Huey Long, and Dr. Francis Townsend.
How did the New Deal contribute to the growthof industrial unions?
Why is the Social Security Act an important piece of legislation?
How did suc-cessful strikes such as the sit-downstrike shown in the photograph lead toa rise in union membership? Political Challenges
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are either a General Motors worker or amember of management during the sit-down strike in Flint, Michigan. Writea letter to your local newspaperdescribing the strike and explainingyour actions during it.
Define: broker state, safety net.
Identify: Frances Perkins, court-packing, Henry Morgenthau, John Maynard Keynes.
Explain Roosevelt’s court-packing plan and how it was received.
What groups made up the New Deal coalition?
How did the New Deal change attitudes toward government?
What does itsuggest about Roosevelt’s method ofcampaigning?
Persuasive Writing Write an essay evaluating the effectiveness of NewDeal measures in ending theDepression.
Define: fascism, internationalism.
Identify: Benito Mussolini, Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler,Manchuria, Neutrality Act of 193
Explain why isolationism was strong in the United States in the early 1930s.
What events caused President Roosevelt to becomemore of an internationalist?
Why did antidemocratic governments rise to power in postwarEurope and Asia?
Without being told thephrase, how would you be able to dis-cover the poster’s meaning? 712 CHAPTER 24 A World in FlamesCountry Dictator Ideology Imperial Expansion In 1931 Japan occupied the northeast Chinese province of Manchuria. In 1937 the Japanese invaded all of China, prompt-ing FDR to authorize the sale of arms to the Chinese Army. How did Roosevelt justify his actions in light of the Neutrality Act? History
Persuasive Writing Write a news- paper editorial urging fellow citizens toembrace either isolationism or inter-nationalism after World War I.
Define: Holocaust, concentration camp, extermination camp.
Identify: Shoah, Nuremberg Laws, Wannsee Conference.
List the groups of people who were persecuted by the Nazis.
Civic Rights and Responsibilities Do you think the German people or othernations could have prevented theHolocaust? Why or why not?
What are some factors that attempt to explain the Holocaust?
How do the photo-graphs show the systematic destructionof Jewish life? Extermination Methods 724 CHAPTER 24 A World in Flames N SEW 200 kilometers 0 Lambert AzimuthalEqual-Area projection200 miles 00° 20°E 50°NNorth Sea AdriaticSeaBlack SeaBaltic Sea FRANCE 90,000BELGIUM 40,000NETHERLANDS 105,000DENMARK 500 GERMANY AND AUSTRIA 210,000 CZECHOSLOVAKIA 155,000POLAND 3,000,000 ITALY 8,000 YUGOSLAVIA 26,000HUNGARY 450,000 BULGARIA 14,000ROMANIA 300,000UKRAINIAN S.S.R. 900,000BYELORUSSIAN S.S.R. 245,000RUSSIAN S.S.R. 107,000BALTIC STATES 228,000 GREECE 54,000 Jewish Losses, 1939–1945
What country had the highest number of Jews in its popu-lation killed?
Geography Skills A rela- tively low percentage of Italy’s Jewishpopulation died in the Holocaust. Fromthis information, how would you com-pare Fascists and Nazis in terms oftheir Jewish policies? 83–9065–77Percentage of Jewish Population Annihilated 50–60 11–26 Number of Jewskilled under Naziracial policiesFRANCE 90,000
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a person living in Germany duringKristallnacht. Write a diary entry describ- ing that night.
Define: hemispheric defense zone, strategic materials.
Identify: America First Committee, Lend-Lease Act, Atlantic Charter.
Individual Action After Roosevelt made the destroyers-for-bases dealwith Britain, some Americans calledhim a dictator. Do you think Rooseveltwas right or wrong in his actions?Explain your answer.
Why was the United States unprepared for Japan’s attack onPearl Harbor?
Based on the geogra-phy of Oahu, why was the location ofPearl Harbor perfect for a naval base?
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of an American in 1940. Write a letter tothe editor of your newspaper explainingwhy you think the United States shouldeither remain neutral or becomeinvolved in World War II.
Define: cost-plus, Liberty ship, disfranchise.
Identify: Reconstruction Finance Corporation, War Production Board,Selective Service and Training Act.
Describe the role of the OWM in the war production effort.
Individual Action Why do you think African Americans were willing to fightin the war even though they suffereddiscrimination in American society?
How effectively did American industry rally behind the wareffort? Give examples to support youropinion.
Why did automo-bile production decrease while tankproduction increased? Challenges to Mobilization
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a draftee who has just completed thefirst week of basic training. Write a let-ter to your parents telling them aboutbasic training and what you hope toaccomplish once the training is over.
Define: periphery, convoy system.
Identify: Chester Nimitz, Douglas MacArthur, James Doolittle, GeorgePatton.
Explain the American strategy in North Africa.
How did the Doolittle raid help boost Americanmorale?
How did code breakers help stop Japanese advances?
How were the Americans able to win the Battle of the Atlantic?
Why do you thinkthe Japanese forces attacked when theydid? Battle of Midway
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of an American soldier fighting in thePacific in World War II. Write a letter toyour family explaining what conditionsare like for you and what you hope toaccomplish during the war.
Define: Sunbelt, rationing, victory garden.
Identify: Rosie the Riveter, A. Philip Randolph, zoot suit, E bond.
Explain how the federal government expanded during the war.
What changes did American citizens and indus-try have to make to adapt to the war?
If you had been a govern- ment official during the war, how wouldyou have proposed paying for the war?
Which cities had populationsover 400,000?
Why wereJapanese Americans interned? Result Result ResultRacial Tensions
Persuasive Writing Write a newspaper editorial urging fellow citizens to con-serve resources so that these resourcescan be diverted to the war effort.
Define: hedgerow, napalm, charter.
Identify: Battle of the Bulge, V-E Day, Harry S Truman, Curtis LeMay,Manhattan Project, V-J Day, UnitedNations.
List the major campaigns on the European and Pacific fronts in 194
Explain how the United States devel- oped the atomic bomb.
Describe the war crimes trials.
Continuity and Change Why do you think the goal of world peace has yet tobe achieved?
If you had been an adviser to President Truman, what advicewould you have given him about drop-ping the atomic bomb? Give reasonswhy you would have given this advice.
Define: Cold War, iron curtain.
Identify: Potsdam, satellite nation.
Facts Why did tensions grow between the United States and the Soviet Union after World War II?
Global Connections At Yalta, what agreement did the “Big Three” come toabout Germany’s future after WorldWar II?
Do you think Roosevelt could have prevented the Cold War?Why or why not?
Expository Writing Imagine you are an adviser to President Truman. Write areport explaining your interpretation ofChurchill’s iron curtain speech.
Define: containment, limited war.
Identify: George Kennan, Marshall Plan, NATO.
How did the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan addressthe spread of communism?
What long-term Cold War strategy did the United Statesfollow?
How did the Long Telegram influence American policy?
When did the United Nations control themost territory in Korea? When didboth sides finally agree upon anarmistice line?
Persuasive Writing Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper explainingwhether you agree or disagree withPresident Truman’s firing of GeneralMacArthur.
Define: subversion, perjury, censure, fallout, fallout shelter.
Identify: loyalty review program, Alger Hiss, McCarran Act, McCarthyism.
Explain the goals of Project Venona.
What did the McCarran Act propose to do?
How did McCarthyism and the RedScare change American society andgovernment?
Why did McCarthy ini- tially receive a lot of support for hisefforts to expose Communists?
Persuasive Writing Imagine you are a newspaper editor during the McCarthyhearings. Write an editorial supportingor condemning Senator McCarthy.
Define: closed shop, right-to-work law, union shop, featherbedding, dynamicconservatism.
Identify: GI Bill, “Do-Nothing Congress,” Fair Deal, Federal HighwayAct.
How did President Eisenhower aid international shippingduring his administration?
In what ways did the Taft- Hartley Act hurt labor unions?
Which parts of the countrydid Dewey win? Why do you think he did so well in these areas? Agendas Truman Eisenhower
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a member of Congress during theTruman administration. Write a speechin which you try to persuade the 81stCongress to either pass or defeatTruman’s Fair Deal measures.
Define: white-collar, blue-collar, multi- national corporation, franchise, babyboom.
Identify: John Kenneth Galbraith, David Riesman, Levittown, Jonas Salk.
Describe how and why the suburbs became popular places to live.
How was the affluent society of the United States inthe 1950s different from previousdecades?
What caused the advertis- ing industry boom in the 1950s?
Descriptive Writing Write an article for a magazine such as Better Homes and Gardens describing changes the American family underwent during the1950s.
Define: flexible response, space race.
Identify: Peace Corps, Berlin Wall, Warren Commission.
Explain the goals of the Alliance for Progress.
What was Kennedy’s goal for the United States in the space race?
What was the role of for- eign aid in the relations between theUnited States and Latin America?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of an American citizen during theCuban missile crisis. Write a journalentry describing the mood of thecountry during that time.
Define: consensus, war on poverty.
Identify: VISTA, Great Society, Medicare, Medicaid, Head Start, Robert Weaver.
Describe how the Great Society pro- grams were inspired.
How did Johnson’s war on poverty strive toensure greater fairness in Americansociety?
What were three legacies of the Great Society?
Why do you think picturessuch as this one would help build sup-port for the war on poverty? 860 CHAPTER 28 The New Frontier and the Great Society in History Esther Peterson 1906–1997 In the 1930s, Boston employers asked women who sewed aprons for them to switch from square pockets to a moredifficult heart-shaped pocket, but theydid not offer any increase in pay. EstherPeterson, a local teacher and outspokenadvocate for women’s rights, led theworkers in a strike for more money. Thewomen won their pay raise. For 60 years,Esther Peterson continued to use her tactand will to fight for women’s rights, tradeunions, and consumers. Born in Provo, Utah, as Esther Eggertsen, Peterson became a teacherin the 1930s. She taught milliners, tele-phone operators, and garment workersat the innovative Bryn Mawr SummerSchool for Women Workers in Industry.In 1961 President Kennedy selected herto serve as Assistant Secretary of Laborand Director of the Women’s Bureau.Peterson thenencouragedKennedy to createa PresidentialCommission on theStatus of Women to focusattention on working women. Under President Johnson, Peterson served as Special Assistant forConsumer Affairs, where she workedon consumer concerns. Lynda JohnsonRobb, daughter of President Johnson,described Peterson this way: “She hada velvet hammer and talked people intodoing what was right, even if we didn’tknow it at the time.” Peterson contin-ued to use her “velvet hammer” for thepublic good throughout her long life. At the time of her death at the age of91, she was actively promoting seniorcitizens’ health issues. Great Society Initiatives
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a biographer. Write a chapter in a biography of Lyndon Johnson in whichyou compare and contrast his leader-ship style to that of John Kennedy.
Define: separate-but-equal, de facto segregation, sit-in.
Identify: NAACP, Thurgood Marshall, Linda Brown, Martin Luther King, Jr.,Southern Christian LeadershipConference.
State the outcome of the Brown v. Board of Education case.
Government and Democracy Why did the role of the federal government incivil rights enforcement change?
Do you think the civil rights movement would have been suc-cessful in gaining civil rights for AfricanAmericans without the help of theNAACP and the SCLC? Explain.
How would youdescribe Elizabeth Eckford’s demeanorcompared to those around her? Whatmight this tell you about her character? Efforts to End Segregation
Expository Writing Take on the role of an African American soldier returning tothe United States after fighting in WorldWar II. Write a letter to the editor ofyour local newspaper describing yourexpectations of civil rights as anAmerican citizen.
Define: Freedom Riders, filibuster, cloture, poll tax.
Identify: Jesse Jackson, Ella Baker, Civil Rights Act of 196
Describe the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 aimed at ending segregation and racial discrimination.
How did tele- vision help the civil rights movement?
How did protesting and lobbying lead to the passage of theVoting Rights Act of 1965?
Photographs Study the photographs in this section. What elements of the photographs show thesacrifices African Americans made inthe civil rights movement?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a journalist for the student news-paper of a college in 1960. Write anarticle for the newspaper describing thesit-in movement taking place across thecountry.
Define: racism, black power.
Identify: Chicago Movement, Richard Daley, Stokely Carmichael, Malcolm X,Black Panthers.
Explain the goals of the Nation of Islam in the 1960s.
Summarize the findings of the Kerner Commission.
How was the Civil Rights Act of 1968designed to help end discrimination?
What were the effects of the assassination ofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr.?
Expository Writing Take on the role of a reporter in the late 1960s. Imagineyou have interviewed a follower of Dr.King and a Black Panther member.Write out a transcript of each interview.
Define: domino theory, guerrilla.
Identify: Ho Chi Minh, Dien Bien Phu, Ngo Dinh Diem.
Explain the goals of the Vietminh.
Government and Democracy Why did Ngo Dinh Diem refuse to hold country-wide elections in Vietnam in 1956?
Why do you think the United States supported the govern-ment of Ngo Dinh Diem?
Howwould you describe the contrastbetween American and Vietnamesesocieties? How do you think this con-trast influenced American thinkingtoward the war?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a Vietnamese peasant in the 1940s.Write a journal entry on your feelingstoward the French.
Define: Vietcong, napalm.
Identify: Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Agent Orange, Ho Chi Minh trail.
Explain how the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution affected the powers ofCongress and the presidency.
Science and Technology Why did the United States use napalm and AgentOrange in its fight against the Vietcong?
Why did fighting in Vietnam turn into a stalemate by the mid-1960s?
Persuasive Writing Imagine that you are a member of Congress in August196
Write a statement supporting oropposing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
Define: credibility gap, teach-in, dove, hawk.
Identify: William Westmoreland, Tet offensive.
Summarize three important events that occurred in 196
Civic Rights and Responsibilities Why did many people believe that theVietnam War reflected racial and eco-nomic injustices in the United States?
Why did support of the Vietnam War begin to dwindle by thelate 1960s?
The phrase “flowerpower” was a slogan of the hippie move-ment. Explain what you think the phrasemeant and how the slogan was used toexpress opposition to the war. Effects of Tet Offensive Opposition to the Vietnam War Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States .Percentage of People Against U.S. Involvement2030 1966 1967 1965 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 197340506070 YearFirst U.S. troops in VietnamTet offensive First withdrawal of U.S. troopsCease- fire signed
Graphs During what two years was opposition to the war lowest? What event occurredaround that time?
In what year did opposition to the Vietnam War peak? How was this sentiment logi-cally related to the withdrawal of American troops?
Expository Writing Imagine that you are living in 196
Write a paragraph forthe local newspaper in which youexplain your reasons for either support-ing or opposing the Vietnam War.
Define: linkage, Vietnamization.
Identify: Henry Kissinger, Pentagon Papers, War Powers Act.
Describe what happened in Vietnam in 1975 after the United States withdrew.
Government and Democracy Why did Congress pass the War Powers Act?How did this act reflect a strugglebetween the legislative and executivebranches?
Why did the invasion of Cambodia cost President Nixon congressional support?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are a college student in 1970. Write ajournal entry expressing your feelingsabout the events at Kent StateUniversity and Jackson State College.
Define: counterculture, commune.
Identify: Port Huron Statement, Tom Hayden, Haight-Ashbury district, JimiHendrix.
Summarize two legacies of the coun- terculture movement.
How did the U.S. Supreme Court validate theactions of the members of the FreeSpeech Movement?
How were hippies differ- ent from members of the New Left?
Why did the counterculture movement decline?
How doesthe bus itself represent values of thecounterculture? Youth Movement Causes
Descriptive Writing Imagine you are a journalist in the 1960s. Write an articlein which you visit a commune anddescribe the hippie culture you see.
Define: feminism, Title IX.
Identify: Equal Pay Act, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,Betty Friedan, National Organization forWomen, Phyllis Schlafly.
Summarize Shirley Chisholm’s political contributions.
How have women’s rights improvedsince the 1960s?
What two events weak- ened the women’s movement after1920?
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a supporter or opponent of the ERA.Write a letter to the editor of your localnewspaper to persuade people tosupport your position.
Define: affirmative action, busing, bilingualism.
Identify: Allan Bakke, Jesse Jackson, Congressional Black Caucus, CésarChávez, La Raza Unida, American Indian Movement.
Analyze how the Bakke case, along with other cases, affected affirmativeaction.
How did the Supreme Court supportcivil rights during the 1970s? Cite twocourt cases and their decisions.
Why have African Americans become significantly moreinfluential in the U.S. Congress since the early 1970s?
Expository Writing Write a magazine article about the conditions that gaverise to the Native American protestmovement of the 1960s and 1970s.
Define: impound, détente, summit.
Identify: Southern strategy, revenue sharing, Henry Kissinger.
Describe Nixon’s New Federalism policy.
What were the results of Nixon’s policy of détente?
How did Nixon’s China visit affect Soviet relations?
What is itsmessage about the impact of the armsbuildup on average citizens in both theSoviet Union and the United States? China Soviet Union Détente Discussion Soviet premier Leonid Brezhnev listens to President Nixon during Brezhnev’s June 1973 visit to Washington, D.C. On June 22 the two signed an agreement on the prevention of nuclear war. What does the word détente mean?History
Expository Writing Take on the role of a member of President Nixon’s staff.Write a press release explaining Nixon’sdomestic and foreign policies.
Define: executive privilege, impeach.
Identify: Sam J. Ervin, John Dean, Federal Campaign Act Amendments.
Evaluate the effects of the Watergate scandal on the way American citizensviewed the federal government.
How did the Watergate scandal alter the balanceof power between the executive andlegislative branches of government?
How did the discovery of the White House tapes change theWatergate cover-up investigation?
How wouldyou describe the scene of Nixon’s leave-taking? What in the photo suggests thatthis is a formal occasion? Why do youthink this ceremony might be importantfor the nation?
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of a television news analyst. Write ascript in which you explain theWatergate scandal and analyze the factors that led to the scandal.
Define: inflation, embargo, stagflation.
Identify: Helsinki Accords, Department of Energy.
Identify the achievement and failure President Carter experienced in theMiddle East during his administration.
How did President Carter attempt to deal with the nation’senergy crisis?
Do you think President Ford should have pardoned RichardNixon? Why or why not?
What effectdo you think images such as this onehad on Americans who were living ortraveling in other countries?
Expository Writing Write an essay identifying what you believe to bePresident Carter’s most important for-eign policy achievement.
Define: guru, transcendental meditation, disco.
Identify: New Age movement, All in the Family.
Summarize the basic beliefs of follow- ers of transcendental meditation.
What new cul- tural trends affected American societyin the 1970s?
How did television in the 1970s reflect society at that time?
Howhas popular music and fashion changedsince the 1970s?
Descriptive Writing View a television program that was popular in the 1970s.Write a description of the program andexplain how it reflected society at thattime.
Define: liberal, conservative, televangelist.
Identify: William F. Buckley, Sunbelt, Billy Graham, Moral Majority.
Explain why evangelical Protestant Christians began to support conserva-tive issues.
What kind of econ- omy did conservatives want?
How did Christian evangeli- cals contribute to a growing conserva-tive national identity?
What impactwould the migration patterns shownhave on representation in the U.S.House of Representatives?
Persuasive Writing Many conserva- tives believe that “government that governs least, governs best.” Write aparagraph supporting or opposing thisstatement.
Define: supply-side economics, budget deficit, contra.
Identify: Reaganomics, Sandra Day O’Connor, William Rehnquist, GeraldineFerraro, Iran-Contra scandal, OliverNorth, Mikhail Gorbachev.
List the groups that Ronald Reagan appealed to in the 1980 presidentialelection.
What was President Reagan’s stance on foreignpolicy?
an Opinion Do you think that SDI (Star Wars) is a good idea? Why orwhy not?
What relation-ship do you see between militaryspending and the national debt?
Expository Writing Take on the role of a newspaper editorial writer during theReagan administration. Write an articlein which you present your opinion ofReagan’s plans for a military buildup.
Define: yuppie, space shuttle, space station.
Identify: AIDS, Sierra Club, American Association of Retired Persons.
Summarize the causes for which sev- eral musicians held concert benefits inthe 1980s.
What new innovations occurred in the nation’sspace program in the 1980s?
How do the social prob- lems the United States faces todaycompare with those the nation faced inthe 1980s?
What elements of the diagram depict the concept of materialism?
Persuasive Writing Choose one of the social problems of the 1980s. Write aletter to members of your favoriteband asking them to perform a concertto benefit your cause.
Define: perestroika, glasnost, downsizing, capital gains tax, grassrootsmovement.
Identify: Boris Yeltsin, Tiananmen Square, Saddam Hussein, H. Ross Perot.
Describe how Mikhail Gorbachev tried to reform the Soviet government.
How did the econ- omy affect the 1992 election?
How did the United States and its Western allies finally achieve victory in the Cold War?
Which nations have signifi-cant oil resources?
Descriptive Writing Imagine that you are traveling in West Germany in 1989when the Berlin Wall is being torndown. Write a letter back home todescribe the event and the feelings ofthe German people.
Define: microprocessor, software, telecommute, Internet, DNA.
Identify: ENIAC, integrated circuit, Silicon Valley, Bill Gates, biotechnology,James Watson, Francis Crick.
Explain how scientific discoveries in biotechnology have improved people’slives.
How have personal computers transformed the workplace?
How have advances in telecommunications and the rise of theInternet affected the standard of livingin the United States?
How would you describe the attitudesreflected in the faces of the peoplephotographed? Technological Revolution
Descriptive Writing Write two para- graphs describing the ways that youand your family use the Internet andhow your way of life would be differentwithout it.
Define: perjury, ethnic cleansing.
Identify: AmeriCorps, Contract with America, Kenneth Starr, DaytonAccords.
Explain why the federal government shut down in 199
What government policies helped create the U.S. prosperity of the 1990s?
Why was President Clinton able to win re-election in 1996?
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a member of Congress. Write a letterin which you attempt to persuade otherlawmakers to vote either for or againstthe impeachment of President Clinton.
Define: chad, strategic defense.
Identify: Al Gore, George W. Bush, Ralph Nader.
What did the Supreme Court decide in Bush v. Gore?
What caused the vote-count controversy inFlorida in the 2000 election?
an Opinion Do you think the 2000 presidential election was decidedfairly? Why or why not?
By how many votes wasGore leading when news networksdeclared him the winner in Florida?What was Bush’s lead when networksdeclared him to be the winner? Bush Goals
Persuasive Writing Take on the role of a Supreme Court justice. Write astatement explaining how you voted inBush v.
Define: terrorism, state-sponsored terrorism.
Identify: Osama bin Laden, al-Qaeda, anthrax.
Explain how the United States responded to the attacks on New YorkCity and Washington, D.C.
Global Connections Why does American foreign policy anger Islamicfundamentalists in the Middle East?
What factors have con- tributed to the rise of Middle Easternterrorist groups?
Persuasive Writing The attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C.,convinced many Americans that moresecurity was needed, even if it meantgiving up some freedoms. Write a letterto a newspaper explaining why you arefor or against increased security.
