Define: civilization, culture, joint-stock company, immigrate, Pilgrim, proprietary colony, indentured servant, subsistence farming, triangular trade, hierarchy, slave code.
Identify: Christopher Columbus, William Penn.
Summarize why settlers came to Jamestown and Plymouth colony. 
What are the different ways in which early settlers in the English colonies developed new and unique forms of government?
What role did religion play in the founding of English colonies?
How did geography influence the way the English colonies developed?
How many colonies were in New England in 1750?
Define: mercantilism, Enlightenment, logic, Great Awakening, customs duty, exports, committee of correspondence, communicate, minuteman.
Identify: John Locke, Stamp Act, Townshend Acts, Intolerable Acts, George Washington, Declaration of Independence.
Which ways did the Great Awakening contribute to the independent spirit of American colonists?
What effect did the Glorious Revolution have on the American colonies?
Imagine you are a colonist in 1767, unhappy about Britain’s policies toward the colonies. Write a pamphlet explaining your position and urging other colonists to sup-port resistance efforts.
Define: republic, framework, recession, popular sovereignty, federalism, separation of powers, interpret, checks and balances, veto, revise, amendment, ratification
Identify: Articles of Confederation, Northwest Ordinance, Shays’s Rebellion, Constitutional Convention, Great Compromise, Three-Fifths Compromise, Federalists, Antifederalists.
Explain why the Antifederalists opposed the Constitution.
How was the Constitution written as a flexible framework of government?
Did the Articles of Confederation or the Constitution provide a better way to solve the problems facing the nation? Explain.
Take on the role of a Federalist or an Antifederalist at a state ratifying convention. Write a speech in which you try to convince your audience to either accept or reject the new Constitution.
Define: conquistador, presidio, hidalgo, encomienda, hacienda, vaquero, Northwest Passage, coureur de bois.
Identify: Francisco Pizarro, Popé.
Explain how the fur trade contributed to the slow growth of New France.
Global Connections The king of Spain created a scheme to oversee his empire in America. What system did he use to govern the distant colonies?
Synthesizing Why did the various groups of Spaniards come to North America?
Were the French or Spanish colonies more successful? Why?
How did the Catholic Church contribute to the Spanish settlement of the New Mexico territory?
Imagine you are an officeholder for the French king and want to support his policies. Write an advertisement for a French newspaper to encourage people to settle in new France.
Define: Puritan, joint-stock company, privateer, burgesses, headright, proprietary colony.
Identify: John Cabot, Walter Raleigh, Powhatan Confederacy.
Explain how tobacco saved Jamestown.
How did the enclosure movement change England’s society?
What caused friction in the Maryland colony?
What factors contributed to the growing rivalry between Spain and England? 
Take on the role of Captain John Smith of Jamestown. Write a town circular explaining to your fellow colonists why trading with the Powhatan Confederacy is a good survival strategy.
Define: Separatist, Pilgrim, heretic.
Identify: William Bradford, Squanto, John Winthrop, Massachusetts Bay Company, Great Migration, Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson.
Explain Why was John Winthrop concerned about the ideas of Roger Williams?
How did Thomas Hooker’s beliefs promote the idea of separation of church and state?
Comparing In what ways were the causes and effects of the Pequot War and King Philip’s War similar?
Why did the Pilgrims feel it was necessary to create their own government?
Imagine you are a Pilgrim in Plymouth Colony. Write a letter to your friends in Europe describing your first few weeks in the new land.
Define: pacifism.
Identify: English Civil War, Maryland Toleration Act, Restoration, William Penn, James Oglethorpe.
Global Connections After the Restoration, why did the English government openly work to promote additional colonization in North America?
How did the English Civil War affect the English colonies in America?
What events led to Cromwell’s rise to power in England?
Imagine that you have been hired by the proprietors of New Jersey to persuade settlers to come there. Write an editorial for a newspaper in England to convince people to settle in New Jersey.
Define: cash crop, plantation, indentured servant, gentry, subsistence farming, Middle Passage, slave code.
Identify: Eliza Lucas, William Berkeley, Royal African Company.
Explain why South Carolina began producing indigo.
How did the geography of the Chesapeake region affect its economic development?
How did the economies of the Chesapeake region and South Carolina differ?
How did the slave trade develop in the Americas?
Imagine you are a backcountry farmer in Virginia. Write a letter to your local newspaper describing how you feel about Sir William Berkeley and the policies he instituted.
Define: town meeting, selectmen, bill of exchange, triangular trade, artisan, entrepreneur, capitalist.
Identify: Grand Banks, fall line, meetinghouse.
Describe the different social classes in New England and the Middle Colonies.
How did Puritanism affect the development of New England society and government?
How did the geography of the New England and Middle Colonies contribute to their economic development?
Would the practice of “Holy Watching” have been easy to do in this town? Why or why not?
Imagine that you are barrel maker in the New England Colonies. Write a letter to a government official stating the problems you have that you want the government to address.
Define: mercantilism, natural rights.
Identify: Charles II, James II, Dominion of New England, Glorious Revolution.
Discuss how England’s Glorious Revolution influenced the American colonies.
How did Governor General Andros’s attempt to weaken colonial resolve increase colonists’ anger towards England?
How did the ideas of the philosopher John Locke contribute to revolutionary ideas in the American colonies?
Why do you think colonial merchant shippers were angry about the Navigation Acts?
Take on the role of a colonial merchant. Write a letter to a relative in England explaining how the Navigation Acts have affected your business.
Define: Enlightenment, Great Awakening, rationalism, pietism, revival.
Identify: Cotton Mather, Pennsylvania Dutch, Stono Rebellion, John Locke, Montesquieu, Jonathan Edwards, George Whitefield.
Explain how the Enlightenment and the Great Awakening influenced the American colonies.
What factors and motivations drove immigration to the American colonies in the 1700s?
Making Comparisons In what ways did enslaved Africans develop their own culture in the American colonies?
Imagine that you are a German immigrant to the colonies in 172
Write a letter to your relatives explaining what your life in the colonies is like and encouraging them to join you in America.
Define: customs duty, inflation, nonimportation agreement, writ of assistance.
Identify: Albany Plan of Union, French and Indian War, Treaty of Paris, Quartering Act.
What argument did the Stamp Act Congress make in protest against the British taxes?
Why do you think the British were so willing to pass new taxes in the face of colonial opposition?
How were the British able to move their troops up the steep cliffs near the city?
Imagine that you are a member of the Sons of Liberty or the Daughters of Liberty. Write a pamphlet explaining what your group does and urging colonists to join.
Define: committee of correspondence, minuteman, Loyalist, Patriot.
Identify: Boston Tea Party, Intolerable Acts, Second Continental Congress, Battle of Bunker Hill, Declaration of Independence.
Government and Democracy After King George III refused to consider the Olive Branch Petition, in what ways did the Continental Congress begin to act like an independent government?
What role did the committees of correspondence play in the colonists’ move toward independence?
Imagine that you were a participant in the Boston Tea Party. Write a diary entry describing the event.
Define: guerrilla warfare, letters of marque.
Identify: William Howe, Nathan Hale, Valley Forge, Marquis de Lafayette, Saratoga, John Paul Jones, Charles Cornwallis, Battle of Kings Mountain.
Global Connections Why were the French at first reluctant to sign an alliance with the colonies?
How did European countries aid the Americans in the war for independence?
How has the artist portrayed the condition of Washington’s army?
Imagine that you are a colonist during the Revolutionary War. Write a letter to convince European nations to support the Americans in the war.
Define: duty, recession.
Identify: Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, Northwest Ordinance,Shays’s Rebellion.
Describe the conditions that led to Shays’s Rebellion.
What do you think was the most serious flaw of the Articles of Confederation? Why do you think so?
How are the issues faced by the federal government today similar to those that were faced by the Confederation Congress?
Take on the role of a journalist during the time of the Confederation Congress. Write an editorial expressing your opinion of Shays’s Rebellion, and suggest how the government might handle such situations better in the future.
Define: popular sovereignty, federalism, separation of powers, legislative branch, executive branch, judicial branch, checks and balances, veto, impeach, amendment.
Identify: Virginia Plan, New Jersey Plan, Great Compromise, Three-Fifths Compromise.
Were the delegates to the Constitutional Convention representative of the American public? Why or why not?
Do you think the Founders were right in making the amendment process difficult? Why or why not?
Why did the delegates choose to conduct the convention behind closed doors?
Take on the role of an observer at the Constitutional Convention. Write a journal entry describing what you witnessed.
Define: Federalist, Antifederalist.
Identify: John Hancock, Patrick Henry.
List the groups of people who opposed ratification of the Constitution.
Explain why the Federalists had an advantage over the Antifederalists.
Government and Democracy Do you think it was important for all the states to ratify the Constitution? Why or why not?
How did the Federalists attempt to assure ratification of the Constitution ?
Why was New Hampshire’s ratification of the Constitution  important?
Define: cabinet, bond, speculator, enumerated powers, implied powers, agrarianism.
Identify: Tariff of 1789, Bank of the United States, Whiskey Rebellion.
Describe the intended purpose of the national bank.
What precedent did George Washington set as president of the United States?
Synthesizing Why did Hamilton think it was important to pay the national debt, the domestic debt, and the state debts?
Imagine you are James Madison. Write a speech explaining why you are against Alexander Hamilton’s financial program.
Define: most-favored nation, alien, sedition, interposition, nullification.
Identify: Jay’s Treaty, Pinckney’s Treaty, Washington’s Farewell Address, Quasi-War, Alien and Sedition Acts.
How did the Alien and Sedition Acts interfere with the lives of people living in the United States?
How did France and Great Britain test American neutrality?
The amendment stipulates that electoral votes for president and vice president are counted and listed separately.
Which states split their electoral votes between Jefferson and Adams?
Write an editorial that responds to George Washington’s Farewell Address.
Define: judicial review, impressment, embargo.
Identify: John Marshall, Louisiana Purchase, Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, Sacagawea, Zebulon Pike.
How did the Supreme Court decision in Marbury v. Madison strengthen the federal judiciary?
How was Jefferson’s presidency similar to and different from those of Washington and Adams in political style, goals, and foreign policy?
Why do you think Pierre L’Enfant designed the city with wide avenues and circular intersections?
Imagine you are a member of the Zebulon Pike expedition in the Colorado territory. Write a journal entry describing what you have seen on the trip.
Define: War Hawks, nationalism.
Identify: Non-Intercourse Act, Tecumseh, William Henry Harrison, Oliver Perry, Hartford Convention, Treaty of Ghent.
Analyze why Perry’s victory on Lake Erie was important for the Americans.
What did Tecumseh’s death signify for Native Americans of the Northwest Territory?
How did the War of 1812 affect the United States?
Think of an event that made you feel patriotic about the United  States. Write a paragraph explaining why the event made you feel this way.
Define: revenue tariff, protective tariff.
Identify: Era of Good Feelings, John C. Calhoun, John Marshall, Kinache, Adam-Onís Treaty, Quadruple Alliance.
Summarize how the Supreme Court rulings in McCulloch v. Maryland and Gibbons v. Ogden strengthened the federal government.
How did the Monroe Doctrine reinforce President Washington’s foreign policy goals?
How did nationalism affect the foreign affairs of the United States?
Imagine you are an editor of a newspaper in Spanish-held Florida. Write an editorial in which you either attack or defend the actions of Andrew Jackson and his militia in seizing Spanish settlements in Florida.
Define: interchangeable parts, labor union, strike.
Identify: National Road, Robert Fulton, Industrial Revolution, Francis C. Lowell,Eli Whitney, Samuel F.B. Morse .
List the changes that occurred as a result of the Industrial Revolution.
Describe advances that were made in transportation during this period.
How did the concept of interchangeable parts revolutionize the manufacturing process?
Synthesizing Why did early labor unions have little success?
Why were steamboats so much more efficient than other shipping methods of the time?
Imagine you are a teenager working in a textile factory in the early 1800s. Write a letter to your family describing your way of life as a factory worker.
Define: cotton gin, planter, yeoman farmer, slave code.
Identify: task system, gang system, driver, Frederick Douglass, Denmark Vesey, Nat Turner.
Explain why industry lagged in the South compared to the North.
How did cotton farming change the South? What aspects of Southern life stayed the same?
Synthesizing Why was song an important part of the enslaved African American  culture?
Imagine you are a European visitor to the South in 1830. Write a letter home explaining your impressions of life in this part of the nation.
Define: ”favorite son,” “corrupt bargain,” mudslinging.
Identify: Missouri Compromise, Henry Clay, William Crawford, American System, Democratic-Republican.
Compare the different campaign strategies of the candidates in the 1824 election.
Groups and Institutions Why was the Democratic-Republican Party formed after the election of 1824?
Synthesizing Why do you think the candidates in the 1828 election focused on mudslinging instead of issues?
What characteristics of Adams shown in the image give clues as to the kind of person he was?
Imagine you are a voter in the election of 182
Write a letter to a family member explaining which presidential candidate you will vote for and why.
Define: spoils system, caucus system, secede, nullification.
Identify: Tariff of Abominations, John C. Calhoun, Daniel Webster, Force Bill, Indian Removal Act, Trail of Tears, Panicof 183
Groups and Institutions In what ways did the United States become more democratic during Jackson’s presidency?
What effect did the Panic of 1837 have on the presidential election of 1840?
Some wealthy Americans claimed that President Jackson’s supporters were a “mob” element in the nation. How does the artist portray Jackson’s supporters? Why do you think so?
Imagine you are a Native American living in the United States during Andrew Jackson’s presidency. Write a letter to President Jackson giving your opinion of the Indian Removal Act.
Define: nativism, romanticism, transcendentalism, utopia.
Identify: Know-Nothings, Second Great Awakening, Charles Grandison Finney, Joseph Smith.
Summarize the goals of the Know Nothings.
What religious denominations increased their influence in the United States during the Second Great Awakening?
How did the writers of the early to mid-1800s reflect American life?
Imagine you are an Irish or German immigrant in the mid-1800s. Write an essay contrasting the United States with your homeland.
Define: benevolent society, temperance, penitentiary.
Identify: Dorothea Dix, Lyman Beecher, Horace Mann, Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
State the main goal of the early women’s movement.
How did the Second Great Awakening affect the reform movements of the mid-1800s?
In what ways did the new penitentiaries change the prison system?
Think of reforms you believe are needed today in the United States. Write a letter to your legislator expressing why you believe the reforms are needed.
Define: gradualism, abolition, emancipation.
Identify: American Colonization Society, William Lloyd Garrison, American Antislavery Society, Frederick Douglass.
Describe how free African Americans worked to end slavery.
Which individuals helped build support for abolition, and what did they do to win that support?
Why is William Lloyd Garrison’s publication of the Liberator considered a turning point in the abolitionist movement?
In which states did the percentage of African American population decrease by at least 5 percent between1820 and 1860?
Imagine that you are working for the Liberator in the 1830s. Write a letter to a friend describing what you hope to accomplish as a member of the staff of an abolitionist newspaper.
Define: Manifest Destiny, squatter, overlander.
Identify: John Louis O’Sullivan, Jethro Wood, John Deere, Cyrus McCormick, John Sutter, Kit Carson, Jim Bridger, Donner Party, Brigham Young.
Evaluate how mountain men helped settle the West.
What two inventions made it easier to farm the frontier?
How did the United States settle its land disputes with Great Britain and the Plains Indians?
Imagine that you emigrated from the East and are living on a frontier farm in the West. Write a letter to a friend in the East describing your daily life.
Define: Tejano, empresario, annexation.
Identify: National Colonization Act, Washington-on-the Brazos, Antonio López de Santa Anna, Sam Houston, Alamo, William B. Travis.
Explain why Texas declared war on Mexico.
Groups and Institutions Why did some Northern leaders oppose admit-ting Texas to the United States?
How did the Texan defeats at the Alamo and Goliad affect Texans?
Imagine that you are living in Texas in the late 1830s. Write a letter to the U.
Define: envoy, cede.
Identify: John Tyler, James K. Polk, “Fifty-four Forty or Fight,” Zachary Taylor, John C. Frémont, Bear Flag Republic, Winfield Scott, Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Summarize the controversy between Mexico and the United States over Texas.
The idea of Manifest Destiny was realized as a result of the war with Mexico. What new problems did this increase in land cause for the United States?
What was the military strategy of the United States during the war with Mexico? Evaluate the success of this strategy.
What symbols of progress are shown trailing the spirit figure heading westward?
Pretend you are James K. Polk, the Democratic candidate for president in the 1844 election. Write a speech in which you explain your platform.
Define: popular sovereignty, secession.
Identify: Wilmot Proviso, Lewis Cass, Conscience Whigs, Cotton Whigs, Free-Soil Party, “Forty-Niners.”
Summarize how Americans responded to the idea of popular sovereignty.
How did the war with Mexico and the Gold Rush affect the slavery issue in the United States?
Explaining Why did Zachary Taylor win the election of 1848?
What elements of the painting suggest the seriousness of the slavery issue being debated?
Imagine you are Henry Clay. Write a speech to present to the Senate.
Define: Underground Railroad, transcontinental railroad.
Identify: Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Fugitive Slave Act, Harriet Tubman, Gadsden Purchase, Kansas-Nebraska Act, Charles Sumner.
Explain how the transcontinental railroad intensified the slavery issue.
How did antislavery activists justify disobeying the Fugitive Slave Act?
What events led to “Bleeding Kansas”?
Imagine you are a reporter for a Southern or Northern newspaper in the 1850s. Write an article on public reaction to Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
Define: referendum, insurrection.
Identify: Republican Party, Know-Nothings, Dred Scott, Lecompton constitution, Freeport Doctrine.
List the two rulings in Dred Scott v. Sandford that increased sectional divisiveness.
What were the main goals of the Republican and American Parties?
How did Americans react to John Brown’s raid?
Did any parties besides the Republican and Democratic survive after1865? How does this support the idea that the 1850s and 1860s were an important transition era in the nation’s history?
Imagine you have just read the Supreme Court’s ruling in the Dred Scott case. Write a letter to the editor explaining your reaction to the decision.
Define: Confederacy, martial law.
Identify: John C. Breckinridge, John Bell, Crittenden’s Compromise, Jefferson Davis.
List two provisions of Crittenden’s Compromise.
How did Lincoln prevent Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland from seceding? Was Lincoln justified in his actions? Why or why not?
Why did Virginia’s secession surprise Northerners?
Imagine you are an adviser to President Lincoln, and you have just heard about the firing on Fort Sumter. Write a brief report for the president, advising him on what steps to take next.
Define: greenback, conscription, habeas corpus, attrition.
Identify: Robert E. Lee, Copperheads, James Mason, John Slidell, Trent Affair, Anaconda Plan.
Explain why the South had difficulty getting supplies from foreign nations.
How did a belief in states’ rights hamper the South during the war?
Comparing Why did the North have an economic advantage over the South?
Why did the South resort to using paper money during the war?
Imagine that you are living in one of the border states at the beginning of the Civil War. Write a letter to a relative explaining why you are planning on joining either the Union or Confederate army.
Define: bounty, blockade runner.
Identify: “Stonewall” Jackson, Irwin McDowell, David G. Farragut, Ulysses S. Grant, George B. McClellan, Emancipation Proclamation.
Summarize why David G. Farragut was considered a hero in the North.
Geography and History Why was seizing control of the Mississippi River an important strategy of the Union navy?
Forming an Opinion Do you think the draft for military service during the Civil War violated civil liberties, or was the need for defense more important? Explain your answer.
What made these vessels superior to regular warships used by the Union and the Confederacy?
Imagine that you are asked to advise President Lincoln about issuing the Emancipation Proclamation. Write a short paper in which you explain the reasons for the advice you give him.
Define: hardtack.
Identify: 54th Massachusetts, Elizabeth Blackwell, United States Sanitary Commission, Clara Barton, Henry Wirz.
State the two factors that contributed to a food shortage in the South during the Civil War.
How did the Emancipation Proclamation affect African Americans in the military?
In what ways do you think the Civil War changed people’s opinions about women’s capabilities?
Why did infections spread so easily in hospitals, resulting in numerous deaths?
Imagine that you are a nurse on one of the battle-fields during the Civil War. Write a journal entry describing the conditions of the soldiers and your reaction to the situation.
Define: forage, siege.
Identify: Benjamin Grierson, Ambrose Burnside, Joseph Hooker, George Meade, Pickett’s Charge, William Tecumseh Sherman.
Explain why the Union victory at Gettysburg was so important.
Geography and History Why was capturing Vicksburg important for the Union?
What do you think might have been the outcome of the war if the Confederates had won the Battle of Gettysburg? Why do you think so?
Take on the role of a Confederate soldier at the Battle of Gettysburg. Write a journal entry describing the battle and your feelings about the result of the battle.
Define: pillage, mandate.
Identify: Philip Sheridan, “Sherman neckties,” March to the Sea, Thirteenth Amendment, Appomattox Courthouse, John Wilkes Booth.
Describe how General Grant conducted the Confederate surrender.
How did Northern military strategy change after General Ulysses S. Grant took command of the Union army?
What was the effect of Farragut’s blockade of Mobile Bay?
What would account for the thousands of non-battle deaths listed in one of the charts?
Take on the role of a reporter living in Georgia during General Sherman’s March to the Sea. Write a brief article describing the Union’s actions and their effects on the people living there.
Define: Reconstruction, amnesty, pocket veto, freedmen.
Identify: Thaddeus Stevens, Radical Republicans, Wade-Davis Bill, Freedmen’s Bureau.
Explain why the efforts to provide African Americans with their own land failed.
What services did the Freedmen’s Bureau provide to Southern refugees and to newly freed people?
What are the benefits of a compromise such as the Wade-Davis Bill to a government? What are the drawbacks?
Take on the role of a Southerner after the Civil War. Write a journal entry describing the postwar South and what you hope the future will hold for the South.
Define: black codes, impeach.
Identify: Civil Rights Act, Fourteenth Amendment, Military Reconstruction Act, Tenure of Office Act.
Evaluate why the congressional election of 1866 was significant to the Radical Republicans.
What actions by the Radical Republicans were intended to protect the civil rights of African Americans?
Do you think Presidents Lincoln and Johnson were wise in not seeking harsh treatment of the Southern states? Why or why not?
Imagine that you are a citizen during Andrew Johnson’s administration. Write a letter to a member of Congress urging him to vote either for or against Johnson’s impeachment.
Define: carpetbagger, scalawag, graft.
Identify: Joseph Rainey, Hiram Revels, Ku Klux Klan Act.
Describe how some white Southerners reacted to the Republican Party gaining power in the South.
How did the establishment of schools, churches, and social organizations benefit African American s during Reconstruction?
Why did white Southerners resent both carpetbaggers and scalawags?
Imagine you are living in the postwar South. You are either a Northerner who has recently moved there or a longtime Southern resident. Write a friend and describe Southern life as you see it.
Define: “sin tax,” tenant farmer, sharecropper, furnishing merchant, crop lien, debt peonage.
Identify: Horace Greeley, “Whiskey Ring,” Panic of 1873, Compromise of187
What factors contributed to improving the economy of the South after Reconstruction?
How did the disputed election of 1876 affect Reconstruction policy?
What details did the artist include in this painting to suggest dynamic activity?
Write a short essay explaining what you consider to be the three most important events of the Reconstruction period.
Define: placer mining, quartz mining, open range, long drive, maverick.
Identify: Henry Comstock, vigilance committee, Chisholm Trail, barbed wire.
List the factors that contributed to the rise of the cattle industry.
Explain how cattle ranching shifted from open range to an organized business operation.
What two developments in the late 1800s led to the decline of the cattle business?
How did the mining industry contribute to the development of theWest?
Write a summary for a story line for a Hollywood movie.
Define: homestead, dry farming, sodbuster, bonanza farm.
Identify: Great Plains, Stephen Long, Homestead Act, Wheat Belt.
Explain why the Great Plains was not suitable for homesteading.
How did the need for new farming techniques on the Great Plains result in technological innovations in agriculture?
What factors contributed to the making of the Wheat Belt in the Great Plains and then to troubled times for wheat farmers in the 1890s?
Write an advertisement persuading people from the East and from Europe to establish homesteads in the Great Plains.
Define: nomad, annuity, assimilate, allotment.
Identify: Little Crow, Indian Peace Commission, George A. Custer, Ghost Dance, Dawes Act.
Analyze how Native Americans responded to land lost due to white settlement of the Great Plains.
How did Chief Joseph resist the government’s attempts to move the Nez Perce to reservations?
Why do you think the government’s policy of assimilation of Native Americans was a failure?
Then, from the point of view of a historian, explain the actions taken against Native Americans within the historical context of the time. Reasons for Failure
Assume the role of a Plains Indian affected by the assimilation policy of the Dawes Act. Write a journal entry describing how you feel about the policy and how it has affected your life.
Define: corporation, economies of scale, fixed costs, operating costs, pool, vertical integration, horizontal integration, monopoly, trust, holding company.
Identify: stockholder, stock, Andrew Carnegie, Bessemer process.
List the new methods of advertising and selling that helped push consumer goods in the late 1800s.
What factors allowed corporations to develop in the United  States in the late 1800s?
Forming an Opinion Do you think an individual today can rise from “rags to riches” like Andrew Carnegie did? Why or why not?
Write a newspaper editorial in which you explain why entrepreneurs such as John D.
Define: deflation, trade union, industrial union, lockout, Marxism, arbitration, closed shop.
Identify: blacklist, Knights of Labor, injunction.
List the groups of workers represented by the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor.
What political contribution did Mary Harris “Mother” Jones make to American society?
Why did early labor unions fail?
Imagine that you are an American worker living in one of the nation’s large cities. Write a letter to a friend explaining why you support or oppose the work of labor unions.
Define: steerage, nativism.
Identify: Ellis Island, Jacob Riis, Angel Island, Chinese Exclusion Act.
Describe where most immigrants to the United States settled in the late 1800s.
Explain why nativist organizations opposed foreign immigrants.
What routes did European and Asian immigrants take to get to the United States?
Why did some Americans blame immigrants for the nation’s problems?
Organizing Complete a graphic organizer by listing reasons nativists opposed immigration to the United States.
Imagine that you are an immigrant who arrived in the1800s. Write a letter to a relative in your home country describing your feelings during processing at either Ellis Island or Angel Island.
Define: skyscraper, tenement, political machine, party boss, graft.
Identify: Louis Sullivan, George Plunkitt, William M. “Boss” Tweed.
Explain what two technologies made the building of skyscrapers possible in the late 1800s.
How did political machines respond to the needs of the people?
Comparing Compare the conditions under which the wealthy class, the middle class, and the working class lived in the United States in the late1800s.
Take on the role of an urban planner in a major city in the late 1800s. Write a letter to members of the city government listings specific reasons for the importance of setting aside city land for a park and recreational area.
Define: philanthropy, realism, vaudeville, ragtime.
Identify: Gilded Age, Social Darwinism, Gospel of Wealth, Scott Joplin.
Describe how changes in art and literature reflected the issues and characteristics of the late nineteenth century.
What were the defining characteristics of the Gilded Age?
Synthesizing Do you think the idea of the Gospel of Wealth is still alive today? Why or why not?
Imagine that you are a newspaper editor in the late 1800s. Write an editorial in which you support or oppose the philosophy of SocialDarwinism.
Define: naturalism, settlement house, Americanization.
Identify: Henry George, Lester Frank Ward, Edward Bellamy, Jane Addams.
Describe the way naturalist writers portrayed the fictional characters in their novels.
How did the efforts of Jane Addams and Mary Brewster help poor people in urban areas in the late 1800s?
What role do you think the government should play in the economy? Give reasons to support your opinion.
Take on the role of an immigrant in the late 1800s. Write a diary entry in which you describe your feelings about your children becoming Americanized while attending the local public school.
Define: patronage, rebate.
Identify: Stalwart, Halfbreed, Interstate Commerce Commission.
Explain how the Pendleton Act created civil service reform.
Describe the events leading to the establishment of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
What groups and regions were strongholds for Republicans and Democrats in the 1880s? Where is their support today?
Why was the Sherman Antitrust Act ineffective?
What similarities do you see between Cleveland’s inauguration ceremony and the ones we have today? Do you see any differences between the ceremonies then and now?
Imagine that you are seeking a federal job in the early 1880s. Write a letter to your congressional representatives urging them to support or oppose the Pendleton Act.
Define: sharecropper, poll tax, grandfather clause, segregation, Jim Crow laws, lynching.
Identify: Ida B. Wells, W.E.B. Du Bois.
Explain what happened to Ida B. Wells after she began campaigning against lynching.
Individual Action Why did Homer Plessy challenge a Louisiana law in1892, and what was the significance of his action?
Examining After Reconstruction, why did many African Americans in the South live in conditions that were little better than slavery?
Imagine that you are living in the 1890s. Write a letter to the editor of the local newspaper explaining your view of the Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v.
Define: imperialism, protectorate.
Identify: Anglo-Saxonism, Matthew C. Perry, Queen Liliuokalani, Pan-Americanism, Alfred T. Mahan, Henry Cabot Lodge.
Explain why Secretary of State James G. Blaine convened the Pan-American conference in 188
What events in the world convinced Americans to support a large navy?
Forming an Opinion Do you think the United States should have supported the planters in their attempt to over-throw Queen Liliuokalani of Hawaii? Why or why not?
How is the U.S. Navy portrayed in relation to the Japanese residents of Yokohama? Do you think the artist shows any bias in this representation? Why or why not?
Imagine that you are living in the United States in the 1890s. Write a letter to the president persuading him to support or oppose an imperialist policy for the United States.
Define: yellow journalism, jingoism.
Identify: José Martí, William Randolph Hearst, Joseph Pulitzer, Theodore Roosevelt, Platt Amendment.
Explain why many Americans blamed Spain for the explosion of the U.S.S. Maine.
Government and Democracy Why did many Filipinos feel betrayed by the U.S. government after the Spanish-American War?
Do you think President McKinley could have taken a different course of action with Spain over Cuba? If so, what kind? If not, why not?
Considering what you have learned about the Rough Riders and this battle, what is inaccurate about the painting? What kind of bias does this misrepresentation show?
Imagine that you are a Filipino living during the time of the U.S. annexation of the Philippine Islands. Write a journal entry in which you describe your feelings about U.S.
Define: progressivism, muckraker, commission plan, direct primary, initiative, referendum, recall, suffrage, temperance, prohibition, socialism.
Identify: Jacob Riis, Robert La Follette, Alice Paul.
State what was provided for by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution.
How did initiative, referendum, and recall change democracy in the United States?
What impact did Susan B. Anthony have on Progressive era reforms?
Under which system do voters seem to have the most control over department heads? Why do you think so? 
Some women in the early 1900s suggested that the Constitution needed an equal rights amendment. Imagine you are living then. Write a letter to the editor of your local paper supporting or opposing such an amendment.
Define: Square Deal, arbitration.
Identify: Northern Securities, United Mine Workers, Hepburn Act, Upton Sinclair.
Explain what was provided for in the Hepburn Act.
How did Upton Sinclair contribute to involving the federal government in protecting consumers?
What impact did Roosevelt’s use of the Sherman Antitrust Act have on business?
Imagine you are living in the early 1900s and have just read Sinclair’s The Jungle. Write a letter to a friend explaining what the novel is about and how it characterizes the Progressive era.
Define: syndicate, insubordination.
Identify: Joseph G. Cannon, Payne- Aldrich Tariff, Richard Ballinger.
Describe how Taft helped conservation efforts, alleviated child labor problems, and strengthened the ICC.
How did replacing Roosevelt’s secretary of the interior cause a dispute between Taft and the progressives?
What was the difference between Roosevelt and Taft regarding the relationship between the president and Congress?
Write a magazine article in which you defend or criticize President Taft’s administration in terms of its support of progressivism.
Define: income tax, unfair trade practices.
Identify: Progressive Party, New Nationalism, New Freedom, Federal Reserve Act, Federal Trade Commission, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Explain why President Wilson proposed the establishment of the Federal Reserve System.
What new federal agencies increased the government’s power to regulate the economy?
Which of Wilson’s reforms do you consider most important? Why?
Imagine that you are a newspaper editor during President Wilson’s administration. Write an article on the shortcomings of the Progressive movement in terms of its attitudes about race.
Define: guerrilla, nationalism, self-determination, propaganda, contraband, U-boat.
Identify: Pancho Villa, Franz Ferdinand, Allies, Central Powers, Sussex Pledge, Zimmermann telegram.
Name the two alliances that Europe was divided into at the start of World War I.
Why did most of President Wilson’s cabinet members support the British?
How did European nationalism contribute to the outbreak of World War I?
How does the order in which countries declared war reflect the European alliance system?
Imagine that you are a Mexican citizen living in Mexico between 1914 and 191
Write a script for a radio newscast in which you express your feelings about American actions in Mexico.
Define: conscription, victory garden, espionage.
Identify: War Industries Board, Bernard Baruch, Liberty Bond, Victory Bond, Committee on Public Information.
Describe the contributions of African Americans during the war.
How did government efforts to ensure support for the war conflict with democratic ideals?
How did World War I cause the federal government to change its relationship with the business world?
How do these images encourage support for the war? How effective do you think they would be today?
Imagine that you are working for the Committee on Public Information. Write text for an advertisement or lyrics to a song in which you attempt to sway public opinion in favor of the war.
Define: convoy, armistice, reparations.
Identify: “no man’s land,” Vladimir Lenin, Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, Fourteen Points, League of Nations, Treaty of Versailles.
List the four nations that dominated the Paris peace conference in 191
Individual Action Why did President Wilson propose his Fourteen Points?
What impact did John J. Pershing and the Battle of the Argonne Forest have on World War I?
Imagine that you are an American soldier fighting in Europe during World War I. Write a letter home describing your situation and how you feel about fighting there.
Define: cost of living, general strike, deport.
Identify: Red Scare, A. Mitchell Palmer, J. Edgar Hoover.
Describe the conditions that African Americans faced after the end of World War I.
Why did Republican Warren G. Harding win the election of 1920?
How did the Palmer raids deprive some citizens of their civil rights?
Imagine that you are a European immigrant working in a factory in the United States in 1919. Write a letter to a relative in Europe describing the feelings of Americans toward you and other immigrants.
Define: anarchist, eugenics, flapper, evolution, creationism, police powers, speakeasy.
Identify: Ku Klux Klan, Emergency Quota Act, Fundamentalism.
Explain why the Eighteenth Amendment was repealed.
How did the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment and the Volstead Act change the federal government’s role?
Synthesizing Why were immigrants from Mexico not included in the quota system set by the immigration acts?
Imagine it is the 1920s. Write a letter to your senator to persuade him or her to either continue to support Prohibition or to work for its repeal.
Define: Bohemian, mass media.
Identify: Carl Sandburg, Eugene O’Neill, Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Describe the main themes of artists and writers during the 1920s.
How did writers, artists, and popular culture of the1920s affect traditional ideas in the United  States?
How did World War I influence the literature written during the 1920s?
How do different elements of this piece work to convey a sense of isolation?
Imagine that you have moved to New York’s Greenwich Village in the 1920s. Write a letter to a friend describing the atmosphere in your neighborhood.
Define: jazz, blues.
Identify: Great Migration, Harlem Renaissance, Claude McKay, Langston Hughes, Cotton Club, Marcus Garvey.
Explain how Bessie Smith’s blues music conveyed universal themes.
Explain the importance of the defeat of Judge John Parker’s nomination to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Describe the goals of Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association.
What actions did the NAACP take to expand political rights for African Americans?
How did the Great Migration affect the political power of African Americans in the North?
How did Duke Ellington create a new musical style that grew out of the ragtime tradition?
Imagine that you witnessed the African American men of the Fifteenth Regiment of New York’s National Guard, who had come back from the war, march through Manhattan and home to Harlem. Write a paragraph describing your feelings upon seeing these men.
Define: normalcy, immunity.
Identify: Ohio Gang, Albert B. Fall, Teapot Dome scandal, Robert M. La Follette.
Evaluate the effects of the Teapot Dome scandal on citizens’ views of the federal government.
How did the Ohio Gang tarnish the Harding Administration?
How did the Democrats lose the chance for victory in the election of 1924?
Imagine you are a newspaper reporter during President Harding’s term. Write an article breaking the news of the Teapot Dome scandal.
Define: mass production, assembly line, welfare capitalism, open shop.
Identify: Model T, Charles Lindbergh, National Broadcasting Company, Columbia Broadcasting System.
Summarize the factors that led to the new consumer society in the United States during the 1920s.
How did the automobile impact American society?
How did the United States government help spur the growth of the airline industry?
How did the growing consumer culture impact the nation’s economy?
Write an article for a contemporary newspaper analyzing the impact of Charles Lindbergh’s transatlantic flight on the development of aviation in the United States and the world.
Define: supply-side economics, cooperative individualism, isolationism, moratorium.
Identify: Charles G. Dawes, Charles Evans Hughes, Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Economic Factors Why did Andrew Mellon work to reduce federal tax rates?
What efforts did the United States make to promote permanent peace and worldwide economic recovery? Were these efforts successful? Explain your answer.
Imagine you are an American business owner or farmer in the 1920s. Write a letter to your representatives in Congress explaining why you think cutting tax rates is a good or bad idea.
Define: stock market, bull market, margin, margin call, speculation, installment.
Identify: Alfred E. Smith, Black Tuesday, Hawley-Smoot Tariff.
Explain the significance of the year 192
How did the practices of buying on margin and speculation cause the stock market to rise?
Determining Cause and Effect Why did the stock market crash cause banks to fail?
Note that decreased demand for automobiles ultimately led to layoffs. These layoffs further decreased the demand for automobiles. What do you think might have ended this cycle?
Write an article for a financial magazine explaining the rapid decline of the stock market in 1929 and the reasons for the Black Tuesday crash.
Define: bailiff, shantytown, Hooverville, hobo, Dust Bowl, soap opera.
Identify: Walt Disney, Grant Wood, John Steinbeck, William Faulkner.
Explain what caused the Dust Bowl conditions on the Great Plains.
Culture and Traditions In what ways did people seek to forget about the Depression?
Making Inferences Why do you think Life magazine was so popular during the 1930s?
Imagine that you are living during the Great Depression. Write a journal entry describing a day in your life.
Define: public works, relief, foreclose.
Identify: Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Bonus Army.
Summarize three major initiatives taken by Hoover to improve the economy and the results of each.
What did business leaders promise Hoover they would do to help the economy? Did they keep their promises?
How did President Hoover’s philosophy of government guide his response to the Depression?
The farmers shown would rather dump their milk than sell it. What did they hope to achieve by their actions?
Imagine that you are a veteran of World War I. Write a letter to members of Congress explaining your circumstances and asking them to give you your bonus early.
Define: gold standard.
Identify: New Deal, polio, bank holiday.
Describe the ways in which early influences and experiences shaped Roosevelt as a politician.
Individual Action Why did Roosevelt’s election lead to an increase in bank runs?
How did FDR’s experiences as governor of New York prepare him for the presidency?
Imagine you are living during the Depression. In your hometown, there has been a bank run. Write a letter to the president describing this event.
Define: deficit spending, binding arbitration, sit-down strike, Social Security Act.
Identify: American Liberty League, Works Progress Administration, National Labor Relations Board.
Contrast the ideas of Father Charles Coughlin, Senator Huey Long, and Dr. Francis Townsend.
How did the New Deal contribute to the growth of industrial unions?
Why is the Social Security Act an important piece of legislation?
How did successful strikes such as the sit-down strike shown in the photograph lead to a rise in union membership? Political Challenges
Imagine you are either a General Motors worker or a member of management during the sit-down strike in Flint, Michigan. Write a letter to your local newspaper describing the strike and explaining your actions during it.
Define: broker state, safety net.
Identify: Frances Perkins, court-packing, Henry Morgenthau, John Maynard Keynes.
Explain Roosevelt’s court-packing plan and how it was received.
What groups made up the New Deal coalition?
How did the New Deal change attitudes toward government?
What does it suggest about Roosevelt’s method of campaigning?
Write an essay evaluating the effectiveness of New Deal measures in ending the Depression.
Define: fascism, internationalism.
Identify: Benito Mussolini, Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Manchuria, Neutrality Act of 193
Explain why isolationism was strong in the United States in the early 1930s.
What events caused President Roosevelt to become more of an internationalist?
Interpreting Why did antidemocratic governments rise to power in postwar Europe and Asia?
Write a newspaper editorial urging fellow citizens to embrace either isolationism or internationalism after World War I.
Define: Holocaust, concentration camp, extermination camp.
Identify: Shoah, Nuremberg Laws, Wannsee Conference.
List the groups of people who were persecuted by the Nazis.
Do you think the German people or other nations could have prevented the Holocaust? Why or why not?
What are some factors that attempt to explain the Holocaust?
What country had the highest number of Jews in its population killed?
A relatively low percentage of Italy’s Jewish population died in the Holocaust. From this information, how would you compare Fascists and Nazis in terms of their Jewish policies? 
Take on the role of a person living in Germany during Kristallnacht. Write a diary entry describing that night.
Define: hemispheric defense zone, strategic materials.
Identify: America First Committee, Lend-Lease Act, Atlantic Charter.
Individual Action After Roosevelt made the destroyers-for-bases deal with Britain, some Americans called him a dictator. Do you think Roosevelt was right or wrong in his actions? Explain your answer.
Interpreting Why was the United States unprepared for Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor?
Based on the geography of Oahu, why was the location of Pearl Harbor perfect for a naval base?
Take on the role of an American in 1940. Write a letter to the editor of your newspaper explaining why you think the United States should either remain neutral or become involved in World War II.
Define: cost-plus, Liberty ship, disfranchise.
Identify: Reconstruction Finance Corporation, War Production Board, Selective Service and Training Act.
Describe the role of the OWM in the war production effort.
Individual Action Why do you think African Americans were willing to fight in the war even though they suffered discrimination in American society?
How effectively did American industry rally behind the war effort? Give examples to support your opinion.
Why did automobile production decrease while tank production increased? Challenges to Mobilization
Take on the role of a draftee who has just completed the first week of basic training. Write a letter to your parents telling them about basic training and what you hope to accomplish once the training is over.
Define: periphery, convoy system.
Identify: Chester Nimitz, Douglas MacArthur, James Doolittle, George Patton.
Explain the American strategy in North Africa.
How did the Doolittle raid help boost American morale?
How did code breakers help stop Japanese advances?
How were the Americans able to win the Battle of the Atlantic?
Why do you think the Japanese forces attacked when they did? Battle of Midway
Take on the role of an American soldier fighting in the Pacific in World War II. Write a letter to your family explaining what conditions are like for you and what you hope to accomplish during the war.
Define: Sunbelt, rationing, victory garden.
Identify: Rosie the Riveter, A. Philip Randolph, zoot suit, E bond.
Explain how the federal government expanded during the war.
What changes did American citizens and industry have to make to adapt to the war?
If you had been a government official during the war, how would you have proposed paying for the war?
Which cities had populations over 400,000?
Why were Japanese Americans interned?
Write a newspaper editorial urging fellow citizens to con-serve resources so that these resources can be diverted to the war effort.
Define: hedgerow, napalm, charter.
Identify: Battle of the Bulge, V-E Day, Harry S Truman, Curtis LeMay, Manhattan Project, V-J Day, United Nations.
List the major campaigns on the European and Pacific fronts in 194
Explain how the United States developed the atomic bomb.
Describe the war crimes trials.
Why do you think the goal of world peace has yet to be achieved?
Analyzing If you had been an adviser to President Truman, what advice would you have given him about dropping the atomic bomb? Give reasons why you would have given this advice.
Define: Cold War, iron curtain.
Identify: Potsdam, satellite nation.
Why did tensions grow between the United States and the Soviet Union after World War II?
Global Connections At Yalta, what agreement did the “Big Three” come to about Germany’s future after World WarII?
Synthesizing Do you think Roosevelt could have prevented the Cold War? Why or why not?
Imagine you are an adviser to President Truman. Write are port explaining your interpretation of Churchill’s iron curtain speech.
Define: containment, limited war.
Identify: George Kennan, Marshall Plan, NATO.
How did the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan address the spread of communism?
What long-term Cold War strategy did the United States follow?
How did the Long Telegram influence American policy?
When did the United Nations control the most territory in Korea? When did both sides finally agree upon an armistice line?
Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper explaining whether you agree or disagree with President Truman’s firing of General MacArthur.
Define: subversion, perjury, censure, fallout, fallout shelter.
Identify: loyalty review program, Alger Hiss, McCarran Act, McCarthyism.
Explain the goals of Project Venona.
What did the McCarran Act propose to do?
How did McCarthyism and the Red Scare change American society and government?
Why did McCarthy initially receive a lot of support for his efforts to expose Communists?
Imagine you are a newspaper editor during the McCarthy hearings. Write an editorial supporting or condemning Senator McCarthy.
Define: closed shop, right-to-work law, union shop, featherbedding, dynamic conservatism.
Identify: GI Bill, “Do-Nothing Congress,” Fair Deal, Federal Highway Act.
How did President Eisenhower aid international shipping during his administration?
In what ways did the Taft- Hartley Act hurt labor unions?
Which parts of the country did Dewey win? Why do you think he did so well in these areas? Agendas Truman Eisenhower
Take on the role of a member of Congress during the Truman administration. Write a speech in which you try to persuade the 81st Congress to either pass or defeat Truman’s Fair Deal measures.
Define: white-collar, blue-collar, multinational corporation, franchise, babyboom.
Identify: John Kenneth Galbraith, David Riesman, Levittown, Jonas Salk.
Describe how and why the suburbs became popular places to live.
How was the affluent society of the United States in the 1950s different from previous decades?
What caused the advertising industry boom in the 1950s?
Write an article for a magazine such as Better Homes and Gardens describing changes the American family underwent during the1950s.
Define: flexible response, space race.
Identify: Peace Corps, Berlin Wall, Warren Commission.
Explain the goals of the Alliance for Progress.
What was Kennedy’s goal for the United States in the space race?
What was the role of foreign aid in the relations between the United  States and Latin America?
Take on the role of an American citizen during the Cuban missile crisis. Write a journal entry describing the mood of the country during that time.
Define: consensus, war on poverty.
Identify: VISTA, Great Society, Medicare, Medicaid, Head Start, Robert Weaver.
Describe how the Great Society programs were inspired.
How did Johnson’s war on poverty strive to ensure greater fairness in American society?
What were three legacies of the Great Society?
Take on the role of a biographer. Write a chapter in a biography of Lyndon Johnson in which you compare and contrast his leadership style to that of John Kennedy.
Define: separate-but-equal, de facto segregation, sit-in.
Identify: NAACP, Thurgood Marshall, Linda Brown, Martin Luther King, Jr., Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
State the outcome of the Brown v. Board of Education case.
Why did the role of the federal government in civil rights enforcement change?
Do you think the civil rights movement would have been successful in gaining civil rights for African American s without the help of the NAACP and the SCLC? Explain.
How would you describe Elizabeth Eckford’s demeanor compared to those around her? What might this tell you about her character? Efforts to End Segregation
Take on the role of an African American soldier returning to the United States after fighting in World WarII. Write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper describing your expectations of civil rights as an American  citizen.
Define: Freedom Riders, filibuster, cloture, poll tax.
Identify: Jesse Jackson, Ella Baker, Civil Rights Act of 196
Describe the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 aimed at ending segregation and racial discrimination.
How did television help the civil rights movement?
How did protesting and lobbying lead to the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965?
Take on the role of a journalist for the student newspaper of a college in 1960. Write an article for the newspaper describing the sit-in movement taking place across the country.
Define: racism, black power.
Identify: Chicago Movement, Richard Daley, Stokely Carmichael, Malcolm X, Black Panthers.
Explain the goals of the Nation of Islam in the 1960s.
Summarize the findings of the Kerner Commission.
How was the Civil Rights Act of 1968designed to help end discrimination?
What were the effects of the assassination ofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr.?
Take on the role of a reporter in the late 1960s. Imagine you have interviewed a follower of Dr. King and a Black Panther member. Write out a transcript of each interview.
Define: domino theory, guerrilla.
Identify: Ho Chi Minh, Dien Bien Phu, Ngo Dinh Diem.
Explain the goals of the Vietminh.
Government and Democracy Why did Ngo Dinh Diem refuse to hold country-wide elections in Vietnam in 1956?
Why do you think the United States supported the government of Ngo Dinh Diem?
How would you describe the contrast between American and Vietnamese societies? How do you think this contrast influenced American thinking toward the war?
Take on the role of a Vietnamese peasant in the 1940s. Write a journal entry on your feelings toward the French.
Define: Vietcong, napalm.
Identify: Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Agent Orange, Ho Chi Minh trail.
Explain how the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution affected the powers of Congress and the presidency.
Science and Technology Why did the United States use napalm and Agent Orange in its fight against the Vietcong?
Why did fighting in Vietnam turn into a stalemate by the mid-1960s?
Imagine that you are a member of Congress in August196
Write a statement supporting or opposing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
Define: credibility gap, teach-in, dove, hawk.
Identify: William Westmoreland, Tet offensive.
Summarize three important events that occurred in 196
Why did many people believe that the Vietnam War reflected racial and economic injustices in the United States?
Why did support of the Vietnam War begin to dwindle by the late 1960s?
Graphs During what two years was opposition to the war lowest? What event occurred around that time?
Generalizing In what year did opposition to the Vietnam War peak? How was this sentiment logically related to the withdrawal of American troops?
Imagine that you are living in 196
Write a paragraph for the local newspaper in which you explain your reasons for either supporting or opposing the Vietnam War.
Define: linkage, Vietnamization.
Identify: Henry Kissinger, Pentagon Papers, War Powers Act.
Describe what happened in Vietnam in 1975 after the United States withdrew.
Why did Congress pass the War Powers Act? How did this act reflect a struggle between the legislative and executive branches?
Why did the invasion of Cambodia cost President Nixon congressional support?
Imagine that you are a college student in 1970. Write a journal entry expressing your feelings about the events at Kent State University and Jackson State College.
Define: counterculture, commune.
Identify: Port Huron Statement, Tom Hayden, Haight-Ashbury district, Jimi Hendrix.
Summarize two legacies of the counterculture movement.
How did the U.S. Supreme Court validate the actions of the members of the Free Speech Movement?
How were hippies different from members of the New Left?
Why did the counterculture movement decline?
How does the bus itself represent values of the counterculture? Youth Movement Causes
Imagine you are a journalist in the 1960s. Write an article in which you visit a commune and describe the hippie culture you see.
Define: feminism, Title IX.
Identify: Equal Pay Act, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Betty Friedan, National Organization for Women, Phyllis Schlafly.
Summarize Shirley Chisholm’s political contributions.
How have women’s rights improved since the 1960s?
What two events weakened the women’s movement after1920?
Take on the role of a supporter or opponent of the ERA. Write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper to persuade people to support your position.
Define: affirmative action, busing, bilingualism.
Identify: Allan Bakke, Jesse Jackson, Congressional Black Caucus, César Chávez, La Raza Unida, American Indian Movement.
Analyze how the Bakke case, along with other cases, affected affirmative action.
How did the Supreme Court support civil rights during the 1970s? Cite two court cases and their decisions.
Why have African Americans become significantly more influential in the U.S. Congress since the early 1970s?
Write a magazine article about the conditions that gave rise to the Native American protest movement of the 1960s and 1970s.
Define: impound, détente, summit.
Identify: Southern strategy, revenue sharing, Henry Kissinger.
Describe Nixon’s New Federalism policy.
What were the results of Nixon’s policy of détente?
How did Nixon’s China visit affect Soviet relations?
Take on the role of a member of President Nixon’s staff. Write a press release explaining Nixon’s domestic and foreign policies.
Define: executive privilege, impeach.
Identify: Sam J. Ervin, John Dean, Federal Campaign Act Amendments.
Evaluate the effects of the Watergate scandal on the way American citizens viewed the federal government.
How did the Watergate scandal alter the balance of power between the executive and legislative branches of government?
How did the discovery of the White House tapes change the Watergate cover-up investigation?
Take on the role of a television news analyst. Write a script in which you explain the Watergate scandal and analyze the factors that led to the scandal.
Define: inflation, embargo, stagflation.
Identify: Helsinki Accords, Department of Energy.
Identify the achievement and failure President Carter experienced in the Middle East during his administration.
How did President Carter attempt to deal with the nation’s energy crisis?
Do you think President Ford should have pardoned Richard Nixon? Why or why not?
What effect do you think images such as this one had on Americans who were living or traveling in other countries?
Write an essay identifying what you believe to be President Carter’s most important foreign policy achievement.
Define: guru, transcendental meditation, disco.
Identify: New Age movement, All in the Family.
Summarize the basic beliefs of followers of transcendental meditation.
What new cultural trends affected American society in the 1970s?
How did television in the 1970s reflect society at that time?
How has popular music and fashion changed since the 1970s?
View a television program that was popular in the 1970s. Write a description of the program and explain how it reflected society at that time.
Define: liberal, conservative, televangelist.
Identify: William F. Buckley, Sunbelt, Billy Graham, Moral Majority.
Explain why evangelical Protestant Christians began to support conservative issues.
What kind of economy did conservatives want?
How did Christian evangelicals contribute to a growing conservative national identity?
What impact would the migration patterns shown have on representation in the U.S. House of Representatives?
Many conservatives believe that “government that governs least, governs best.” Write a paragraph supporting or opposing this statement.
Define: supply-side economics, budget deficit, contra.
Identify: Reaganomics, Sandra Day O’Connor, William Rehnquist, Geraldine Ferraro, Iran-Contra scandal, Oliver North, Mikhail Gorbachev.
List the groups that Ronald Reagan appealed to in the 1980 presidential election.
What was President Reagan’s stance on foreign policy?
Forming an Opinion Do you think that SDI (Star Wars) is a good idea? Why or why not?
What relationship do you see between military spending and the national debt?
Take on the role of a newspaper editorial writer during the Reagan administration. Write an article in which you present your opinion of Reagan’s plans for a military buildup.
Define: yuppie, space shuttle, space station.
Identify: AIDS, Sierra Club, American Association of Retired Persons.
Summarize the causes for which several musicians held concert benefits in the 1980s.
What new innovations occurred in the nation’s space program in the 1980s?
How do the social problems the United States faces today compare with those the nation faced in the 1980s?
What elements of the diagram depict the concept of materialism?
Choose one of the social problems of the 1980s. Write a letter to members of your favorite band asking them to perform a concert to benefit your cause.
Define: perestroika, glasnost, downsizing, capital gains tax, grassroots movement.
Identify: Boris Yeltsin, Tiananmen Square, Saddam Hussein, H. Ross Perot.
Describe how Mikhail Gorbachev tried to reform the Soviet government.
How did the economy affect the 1992 election?
How did the United States and its Western allies finally achieve victory in the Cold War?
Which nations have significant oil resources?
Imagine that you are traveling in West Germany in 1989 when the Berlin Wall is being torn down. Write a letter back home to describe the event and the feelings of the German people.
Define: microprocessor, software, telecommute, Internet, DNA.
Identify: ENIAC, integrated circuit, Silicon Valley, Bill Gates, biotechnology, James Watson, Francis Crick.
Explain how scientific discoveries in biotechnology have improved people’s lives.
How have personal computers transformed the workplace?
How have advances in telecommunications and the rise of the Internet affected the standard of living in the United States?
Write two paragraphs describing the ways that you and your family use the Internet and how your way of life would be different without it.
Define: perjury, ethnic cleansing.
Identify: AmeriCorps, Contract with America, Kenneth Starr, Dayton Accords.
Explain why the federal government shut down in 199
What government policies helped create the U.S. prosperity of the 1990s?
Why was President Clinton able to win re-election in 1996?
Take on the role of a member of Congress. Write a letter in which you attempt to persuade other lawmakers to vote either for or against the impeachment of President Clinton.
Define: chad, strategic defense.
Identify: Al Gore, George W. Bush, Ralph Nader.
What did the Supreme Court decide in Bush v. Gore?
What caused the vote-count controversy in Florida in the 2000 election?
Forming an Opinion Do you think the 2000 presidential election was decided fairly? Why or why not?
By how many votes was Gore leading when news networks declared him the winner in Florida? What was Bush’s lead when networks declared him to be the winner?
Take on the role of a Supreme Court justice. Write a statement explaining how you voted in Bush v. Gore.
Define: terrorism, state-sponsored terrorism.
Identify: Osama bin Laden, al-Qaeda, anthrax.
Explain how the United States responded to the attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C.
Global Connections Why does American foreign policy anger Islamic fundamentalists in the Middle East?
What factors have contributed to the rise of Middle Eastern terrorist groups?
The attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C., convinced many Americans that more security was needed, even if it meant giving up some freedoms. Write a letter to a newspaper explaining why you are for or against increased security.
