How did physical geography impact industrial growth?
How did tycoons inﬂuence the growth of corporations?
How did inventions impact demands for labor?
How did the government interact with big business?
How did urban development change the landscape of America?
How did race, gender and social status aﬀect American politics?
Source: pageNum_Recordset1=1Gallery 1.1 The United States in Maps How do the maps above demonstrate that the United States was geographically ready for the Industrial Revolution?
1 The Growth of Railroads Click to watch the growth of railroads video: www.youtube.com/watch?
This ﬁrst model ran on ethanol fuel and used bicycle tires for wheels. Seven years later, Henry Ford found the Ford Motor Company in Detroit, Michigan. In 1908, the Ford Motor Company produced the famous Model-T which served as the basis for autos in the future. 14Interactive 1.2 Gospel of Wealth Excerpt from “Gospel of Wealth” Read here: historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5766/ 1) How does Andrew Carnegie view the role of the wealthy?
How does Andrew Carnegie view charity?
What part of the American identity does Carnegie emphasize in this document?
How does this document reﬂect the "Forty-Millionaire Carnegie in his Great Double Role" political cartoon?
. Source Detroit Population 1900 to 2010. Source: images&search=detroit+population+history+graph&type=images How does the population growth in Detroit reﬂect the growth of the Auto Industry?
How did labor change and stay the same from pre- Industrial Revolution to during the Industrial Revolution?
What inventions greatly changed how Americans work?
To what extent did labor beneﬁt from the Industrial Revolution?
To what extent did government interact with the economy?
4 The Cross of Gold Speech Check out an excerpt of the “Cross of Gold Speech” here! 1) What grievances does William Jennings Bryan address in this speech?
How does he compare farmers to those on the Atlantic Coast?
How does this speech r epresent the goals of the Populist Party?
The Knights championed both skilled and unskilled 22Two young children work in a textile mill. Source: Library of Congress Source: 0809222299/45391/USChart2.jpg 1) What does this graph tell you about how Americans lived and worked?
People then, as well as today, migrated for many reasons. The reasons that people move are categorized as push and pull factors. Welcome to America When immigrants entered the US, they did through two major entry points: Angel Island in California and Ellis Island in New York. The majority of European immigrants arrived in New York and Asian immigrants arrived in California. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. How did physical geography impact industrial growth?
7 Immigration Clickable Map Learn more about who moved where with this clickable map. Think Geography! Why would more Asian immigrants enter through California, while more European immigrants came in through New York?
9 An Honest Graft?
What challenges did American society face?
How did Americans respond to these challenges?
What were the goals of reformers?
1 Muckraking How are the articles in the gallery above examples of Muckraking?
2 Crash Course - The Progressive Era Learn more about the Progressive Era in this video from Crash Course Interactive 2.3 The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Use this website to answer the questions in the blue box. What potential problems can you identify in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory that may have contributed to the death of so many workers?
6 Pure Food and Drug Act and the Food and Drug Administration How has the Food and Drug Administration evolved since its creation?
In 1916, Paul and Burns formed the National Woman’s Party (NWP) as a single issue party, and that issue was women’s suﬀrage. They focused their eﬀorts in Washington, DC pushing for a national amendment. Early on, it was decided that the NWP would not endorse any candidate, but they were very critical of the Democrats as they were currently the party in power. Unlike their British counterparts, they decided not to put their campaign on hold in order to support the World War I eﬀort. They picketed the White House and, when they were arrested for it, they attempted a hunger strike. While many Americans did not approve of their tactics, they were still outraged that these women were being abused and force-fed in jail. The eﬀorts of the NWP served to make groups like NAWSA look reasonable by comparison. It was a combination of the diﬀerent eﬀorts of groups, such as NAWSA and NWP , and the eﬀorts of patriotic women who worked tirelessly to support the war eﬀort that ﬁnally gained passage of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1919 54 According to the cartoon, where did women experience early success in gaining suﬀrage?
10 Comparing Women Can you tell these two suﬀragists apart?
11 Crash Course Women’s Suﬀrage Want to learn more?
13 Literacy Tests Would YOU be able to pass a literacy test?
14 The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow (PBS.ORG) Use the interactive map to identify examples of Jim Crow laws. 1. What laws most disturbed you?
What law surprised you the most?
Why types of laws seemed most common?
15 Jim Crow Narratives Listen to personal narratives from individuals that experienced Jim Crow ﬁrsthand. What challenges did these individuals face?
17 NAACP that emerged was Booker T. Washington, an African American educator. He founded the Tuskegee Institute, which was a vocational school for African Americans in the south. He believed that African Americans Explore the NAACP website and identify the issues they are addressing today. How are these challenges similar to and diﬀerent from those faced during the Progressive Era?
18 You Decide: Booker T. Washington or W.E.B. DuBois?
Describe the objects or people in the cartoon.2. What symbols can you identify?
What is the cartoonist’s opinion or message on this issue?
19 LaFollette’s Views Some of LaFollette’s views are still debates occurring today. Where do you fall on these issues?
20 How did Teddy Bears Get Their Names?
At the Republican convention, when Taft’s supporters refused to unseat him as the incumbent, Roosevelt’s supporters held their own convention a month later in August of 1912. The Progressive Party became known as the Bull Moose Party after Roosevelt had boasted that he was “as strong as a bull moose.” The split in the Republican party between Taft’s conservative supporters and Roosevelt’s progressives split the Republican vote, thus handing the presidency to Woodrow Wilson--the ﬁrst Democratic president since the election of Grover Cleveland in 1892. 70 1. What does this cartoon suggest about Taft’s administration?
What does Roosevelt’s response seem to be?
Why were the 1890s a turning point in American foreign policy history?
To what degree was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish- American War?
What challenges did America face in governing an empire?
Were Wilson’s 14 Points idealistic or realistic?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish-American War?
What is the main argument presented by the cartoonist?
What evidence does the cartoonist present for his argument?
Is the argument convincing?
To what extent was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny in the 1840s?
Section 2 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Why were the 1890s a turning point in American foreign policy history?
In American political cartoons, Uncle Sam and Columbia have often been used to represent the United States. In this cartoon, Uncle Sam refers to the U.S. government, while Columbia is representative of the American people. 88 1. What are some of the symbols that are critical to understanding the political cartoon?
What is the cartoonist’s perspective on assistance for Cuba?
12 Popular Songs Before there was iTunes, popular songs were purchased as sheet music, for play on pianos at home. Take a look here at the popular songs in 1898. What songs are you familiar with?
Describe the objects or people in the cartoon.2. What words are being stepped over by John Bull (England) and Uncle Sam (United States)?
What issue is this political cartoon about?
16 American Anti-Imperialist League To read the Platform of the American AntiImperialist League, look here Does this political cartoon appear to be in favor of American expansion, or opposed to it?
17 Promoting/Rejecting Imperialism Identify whether the following arguments are promoting imperialism or objecting to it. For what reasons was imperialism supported by some and opposed by others?
What is the subject of the political cartoon?
What is the occasion of the cartoon?
Who is the intended audience of the cartoon?
What is the purpose of the cartoon?
Compare the various nationalities portrayed in the cartoon. What impressions might such portrayals leave with the audience?
, the United States asserted its newly acquired power politically, physically and economically throughout the early twentieth century. Following America’s acquisition of Cuba and Puerto Rico, the debate as to whether the Constitution followed the ﬂag raged fully. Cuba How well did America live up to those ideals of an “empire of liberty” in the Caribbean while projecting its power?
25 Presidential Policy Toward Latin America Can you identify the policies?
Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
What can be learned about the changes in American character from the manner in which the U.S. mobilized, prepared, and participated in a world war both at home and abroad?
How did the geography of Europe impact WWI warfare?
To what extent should the victors of a war be permitted to structure a post-war peace?
By the time the United States joined the conﬂict, Europe had already been embroiled in a bitter stalemate for just over three years, leading to hundreds of thousands of casualties,both military and civilian. While eager to join the ﬁght to support the Allies, Wilson knew that in order for U.S. troops to be successful in Europe, a wartime mentality would need to be developed and strengthened not only among soldiers but among all Americans on the homefront. Revving up the American “war machine” would require a lot of work. Opposition to the War While Wilson was quite certain that he could secure the approval of Congress, he did anticipate dissent. He didn’t have to wait long. At 1:00 a.m. on April 6, 1917, after 15 hours of debating President Wilson’s request for a declaration of war against Germany, a roll call vote began in the U.S. House of Representatives. When the clerk of the House came upon the name of Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the ﬁrst woman elected to Congress stood up and declared, “I want to stand by my country but I cannot vote for war. I vote no.” In later years she reﬂected on this action by saying, “I believe that the ﬁrst vote I cast was the most signiﬁcant vote and a most signiﬁcant act on the part of women, because women are going to have to stop war. I felt at the time that the ﬁrst woman [in Congress] Section 2 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
7 In Flanders Fields For a powerful reading of the poem click here! Poppies with a Purpose Do you ever wonder why Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) volunteers give you a paper poppy after you give them a donation?
Assuring the country that World War I was being fought for a moral cause and for a lasting, postwar peace in Europe, Wilson outlined his Fourteen Points. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
From a political and economic perspective, were the actions of government and business seen as more conservative or innovative during this decade?
What part did the League of Nations play in the shift toward isolationism by the U.S. after WWI?
At what point can fear lead to infringement upon an individual or group’s civil liberties?
Did the short-term victories of the labor movement in the 1920s ultimately help or hinder its long-term goals?
To what extent did the contradiction between agriculture and business contribute to economic bust by the end of the decade?
This law’s aim was to curb the tide of immigrants by setting a yearly constraint of immigrants entering the country to 350,000. The law further went on to restrict immigration of each nationality to 3 percent of the 1910 U.S. census ﬁgures. In 1924 the Emergency Quota Act was strengthened to completely exclude Japanese immigrants to the United States. Laws passed reﬂecting Anti-Asian sentiment was nothing new. The Emergency Quota Act continued an earlier trend established in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Legislation, such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the Gentleman’s Agreement of 1907, put restrictions speciﬁcally on Japanese immigrants. Pressure from labor groups helped to validate laws during the 1920s designed to speciﬁcally exclude Asian immigrants. 147 Interactive 5.5 Says the Foreigner Is Not Appreciated Why would labor groups pressure the government to pass laws like the Emergency Quota Act of 1921?
82, and by 1929 the average was only $2.30. Section 2 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. From a political and economic perspective, were the actions of government and business seen as more conservative or innovative during this decade?
The economy grew at 4.2% Gross National Product (GNP) on average, each year of the decade. America had become an urban nation where urban centers and cities were the place many wanted to be. As cities rose to prominence in the eyes of many, small town attitudes had lost their hold on the predominating culture. As many moved into the booming cities like New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago, changes in thinking had to accompany changes to everyday living. This was diﬃcult for many as they experienced a moral and sometimes cultural tug-of-war between small town safety and close ties to others, hard work, and strict morals and that of anonymous crowds, money makers, and pleasure seekers of larger cities. The conﬂicts of the 1920s pitted a more modernist, urban culture against a more traditionalist, rural culture. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
In what ways did the emergence of the double standard reﬂect the broader struggle for women between traditional and modern societal and cultural standards?
To what extent did growing venues of mass media shape a mass culture?
In what ways did the arts of the Harlem Renaissance break down racial boundaries?
Detroit’s location, situated on the international border with Canada, with only the Detroit River separating the two countries, provided the perfect opportunity for organized crime to ﬂourish. Seventy-ﬁve percent of all alcohol smuggled into the United States during prohibition, came across the Detroit River from Canada. The Purple Gang, led by the Bernstein brothers, took advantage of the situation and controlled smuggling and distribution operations in Detroit throughout the decade of the 1920s. Al Capone, one of the most infamous gangsters during the prohibition era, counted on Detroit’s Purple Gang to supply his mob with illegal alcohol. Instead of curing many of society’s ills, it soon became clear that prohibition was having the opposite eﬀect, leading to a rise in violence and crime and a breakdown of order. Instead of stopping the production, sale and distribution of alcohol, prohibition pushed the manufacture and drinking of alcohol underground, often accompanied by devastating outcomes. People began to make their own alcohol, known as “bathtub gin” or “moonshine” in their homes. Bootleggers also tried to stretch their supply of alcohol by diluting it with substances such as wood alcohol, rubbing alcohol, or other lethal chemicals that could lead to ailments from blindness to death. Organized Crime In addition to disrespect for the law that prohibition helped to create, there were other harmful eﬀects as well. The most harmful eﬀect was the ﬂow of money away from lawful or law-abiding businesses and into organized crime. In almost every major city, the opportunity to make and sell liquor at an enormously high proﬁt rate was seized by underground gangs. Chicago for example, was known as the most corrupt and crime-ridden cities in America not only in the 1920s but the 1930s as well. 154 What role did geography play in Chicago’s emergence as one of the most corrupt cities in America during the 1920s?
7 Al Capone To view a succinct video of Al Capone and organized crime in the city of Chicago, watch the short video by the Smithsonian “Bullet Proof,” Chicago Daily Tribune, April 29,1926. Accessed through The Janet A. Ginsburg Chicago Tribune Collection, Michigan State Library Based on what is depicted in this cartoon, why does the author think that prohibition is a failure?
Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
8 million of the country’s 12 million African-Americans lived in cities. And along with the massive inﬂux of African-Americans to large cities came rising tensions, especially in cities in the North. The result was more than 25 urban race riots culminating in the summer of 1919. The NAACP and the Campaign Against Lynching As a result of the alarm to African-Americans caused by the race riots, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) undertook an anti-lynching campaign. The NAACP worked through the court system to gain civil rights protections for African-Americans. Under the leadership of Executive Secretary James Weldon Johnson the group supported an anti-lynching bill Section 5 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
14 The Harlem Renaissance Listen to the music of the Harlem Renaissance here! Interactive 5.15 Voices of the 20s Matching Activity Can you ﬁgure out who said what?
How did economic, political, social/ cultural choices made a decade earlier contribute to the start of the Great Depression?
How did environmental factors aﬀect the Great Depression?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros andcons associated with his response?
How did the Great Depression aﬀect American citizens?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and whatwere pros and cons associated with hisresponse?
1 What Caused the Great Depression?
In March of 1933, it is estimated that ﬁfteen and one half million American workers were unemployed. The Impact of the Depression in Cities In cities across the country, many Americans were unable to provide for themselves and their families. Destitute and unable to pay their mortgages, some Americans suddenly found themselves without work and homeless. Before long, “Hoovervilles” or shantytowns--small towns consisting largely of shacks emerged on the outskirts of cities. While some consisted of only a few families, others grew to the point where they functioned like communities. For some quick but interesting facts about shantytowns during the Depression visit this site: Daily, the urban poor could be found scrounging throughout the city, searching for food by digging through garbage cans or, in some cases, begging on street corners. In the absence of government relief programs, people could also be seen waiting in long lines, commonly known as “bread lines,” in order to receive nourishment. With so many Americans living in poverty, community organizations began to open soup kitchens to feed the hungry. 172Interactive 6.2 Crash Course - the Great Depression Learn more in this video from John Green Interactive 6.3 Shanty Town Facts Learn more at this website from American Historama. Interactive 6.4 Brother Can You Spare A Dime?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros and cons associated with his response?
What were the causes of World War II?
How did the civic values of the Axis powers diﬀer from the core democratic values of the United States?
Would the alliance of Axis powers have happened if the U.S. had not adopted a policy of Isolationism?
How did American civic values contribute to the role the U.S. home front played during WWII?
Could steps have been taken by the Allies that would have prevented or greatly reduced the impact of the Holocaust?
What were the major turning points of the war in each theater of war?
How did the role of technology aﬀect the outcome of World War II?
How did World War II change the foreign policy of the United States?
What changes do you see on the 1923 map?
What countries seemed to have lost the most territory?
2 Two World Wars but One Global Conﬂict Click here for a video from the History Channel. Interactive 7.3 How did the Versailles Treaty Change the World?
Hitler used the results of the popular vote and his rising political inﬂuence to demand that he be installed as chancellor of Germany. After the Reichstag ﬁre was blamed on communists, he persuaded the German president, the German people, and the Nazi Party-controlled Reichstag to grant him “emergency powers” necessary to protect the country. He suspended civil liberties and began the process of purging Germany of anyone who might oppose him. The communist party was banned, while freedom of the press and of assembly were denied. A month later, another act was passed which gave Hitler powers to bypass both the Reichstag and the country’s constitution. With his power expanding, Hitler had his enemies, rivals, and even former friends murdered in 1934 in what became known as “Night of the Long Knives.” When the German president died later that summer, Hitler assumed full dictatorial 204Interactive 7.7 How did Hitler Rise to Power?
While oﬃcially remaining neutral, the United States was preparing for war. Political Cartoon Analysis Ho Hum! No chance of contagion. (appeared in May 1941) 1. What is the subject of the political cartoon?
What are the circumstances that would have led to the creation of the cartoon?
For whom would the cartoon have been created?
What is the message that Dr. Seuss is attempting to get across to the audience?
The massive assault into Soviet territory was composed of the largest military force ever assembled: 3 million troops, 625,000 horses, 3350 tanks, and 2,270 aircraft. Despite Allied warnings, the Soviets were caught unprepared. The seemingly unstoppable German troops blitzkreiged their way into heart of the Soviet Union throughout the summer of 1941. Churchill and Roosevelt Establish Allied War Goals Meanwhile, in preparation for war, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston Churchill gathered for a secret meeting aboard the USS Augusta oﬀ the coast of Newfoundland. There, the two leaders forged the Atlantic Charter, a document that contained the major goals that would govern Allied aims throughout the war. The document, which echoed many of Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points from World War I, proclaimed that the Allies would seek no territorial gains and would promote principles that would reﬂect their “hopes for a better world.” The Atlantic Charter would serve as the foundation upon which the United Nations would be constructed at the end of the war, replacing the broken and ineﬀective League of Nations. Primary Source Analysis: The Atlantic Charter 1. Do a close reading of the Atlantic Charter. 2. What are the principles of the Charter that Churchill and Wilson thought would bring about “a better world”?
What principals are similar to Wilson’s Fourteen Points?
Interactive 7.20 Declaration of War Against the US To read Hitler’s speech declaring war on the United States, click here. Interactive 7.21 State of the World Pre-WW2 How powerful were the military powers of the US, Nazi Germany, and Japan prior to Pearl Harbor?
What is the subject of the poster?
How is the subject of the poster being used to promote the war eﬀort?
What techniques are being used in the poster to create a response in the reader?
Does the poster appeal more to reason or to emotions?
How are the techniques used in this poster similar to techniques used today?
30 A Japanese Interment Story Local San Diego born and raised, Japanese Internment survivor Ruth Voorhies tells her experience during World War 2 when her family was placed in the Poston Arizona Japanese Internment camp. The experience was a tragic event that never should have happened and was a violation of American rights. Was the conduct of the United States during WWII consistent with its values?
Technology Gives Allies the Upper Hand in the Battle of the Atlantic In the North Atlantic, technological advancements helped to counter the German U-Boat threat to Allied supply lines. Radar, which had been used so eﬀectively to intercept German planes over Great Britain in 1940, was now used in planes to detect German U-Boats on the surface of the Atlantic. For U-Boats patrolling below Section 5 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. What were the causes of World War II?
What kinds of technological weapons are morally acceptable and what kinds are not?
Under what circumstances is it morally acceptable to bomb civilians during a war?
Was it the right decision for the U.S. Government to bring Nazi rocket scientists to the U.S. to help develop the American space program?
If the Nazi medical experiments produced medical data that would be useful for today's researchers, would it be ethical to use that data?
Should a doctor use his or her medical knowledge to assist the military or government design physical or mental techniques for interrogating prisoners of war?
Is it heroic to use new weapons technologies that allow people to kill from a distance, without ever seeing their enemies?
What is the subject of the infographic?
Who created it and why?
What are the strengths of the infographic?
What are its weaknesses?
What are the sources for the infographic?
Are there any errors in the infographic?
Some camps were near factories or places wher e raw materials were extracted and the prisoners were used as forced labo r. Prisoners were used ruthlessly and without regard to safety at forced labor camps, resulting in high mortality rates. Gas chambers were used as the SS began to use the camps to kill their targeted groups. In Poland a concentration camp complex was developed called Auschwitz. Created by the Nazi leaders, Auschwitz became the lar gest camp of its kind. It was equipped with multiple gas chambers, a crematorium and places for medical experiments. 261Interactive 7.43 Ghettos in Poland Video clip of Warsaw Ghetto from USHMM wlc/en/media_ﬁ.php?
44 Animated Map Link to animated map from USHMM media_nm.php?
Primary Source Analysis: Using the Photo Analysis chart from the National Archives ( photo_analysis_worksheet.pdf ) observe some of the photos from this period in history. You can ﬁnd many sources online, but one of the most comprehensive is from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (www.ushmm.org .) Documenting the number of lives lost during the Holocaust is challenging because there is no one document with these numbers. It is estimated that around 11 million people were killed, including the 6 million Jews. 266Interactive 7.46 Confronting the Holocaust What can we learn today from American action and inaction in the face of the refugee crisis in spring 1939 and the deportation of Hungarian Jews ﬁve years later?
What does the newscaster explain to calm the public’s fears?
What was Eisenhower's role?
5-2 million would not or could not return home. Destruction of homes and entire communities made it impossible for some to return home and in other places pogroms were initiated to keep Jews from resettling in Eastern Europe. Because of this many Jewish refugees moved from Poland to the Western European countries. There were also committees established at this time that were promoting the idea of creating a Jewish homeland in Palestine. Read page of one the document below written in 1950. Answer the following: 1. How many people were displaced?
What factors contributed to the Cold War?
What were the causes of the American policy of containment?
The Soviets had also disagreed bitterly with the United States and Britain about tactics Section 1 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. What factors contributed to the Cold War?
Image source: world-war-ii-the-fall-of-nazi-germany/w32_45602386/main_900.jpg?
1 Who Said it?
2 The United Nations Explore the UN Website: What issues are the United Nations working on today?
3 Comparing Economic Systems What are some of the diﬀerences between capitalism and communism?
4 Truman Listen to Truman’s Speech here! The Truman Doctrine and Marshall Plan have often been called “two halves of the same walnut”, different in many ways but sharing the same purpose. Can you identify the similarities and differences between the two plans?
5 Containment Need Help with the “Stop and Think” above?
jpg?
5 million tons of supplies. The Soviets ﬁnally gave up the blockade in May of 1949, and Germany oﬃcially became two countries. Berline also remained divided between East and West. As divisions increased in Europe, the superpowers began to form new military alliances as well. With the Soviet Union’s use of its veto power in the Security Council of the UN, it became clear to Western Europe that they would have to look for another means by which to protect itself from Soviet aggression. In April 1949, several nations joined to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). This organization included the United States, Canada, and ten Western European nations. The founders included nations such as Britain and France, with Greece, Turkey, and West Germany following a few years later. Member nations agreed that an armed attack on one of them would be considered an attack against them all. This plan for collective security meant that they would commit to mutual military assistance, and the nations formed a standing army to defend Western Europe in the event of a Soviet invasion. The creation of NATO prompted the Soviet Union to form their own security alliance called the Warsaw Pact. This organization was comprised mostly by the Soviet satellite nations in Eastern Europe. 284 Digging Deeper. Complete an Episodic Summary of the Berlin Airlift using the Ofﬁce of the Historian. Use the model Graphic Organizer below by recreating it on a separate sheet of paper or in Google Docs. Interactive 8.6 What is NATO?
8 Intrepretation Match Karl Marx developed the original theory of communism, but the Soviet Union and China each developed their own interpretations. Read the resource and match the interpretations below with with the correct theory of communism. Analysis: Although communism took different forms in the Soviet Union and China, the United States perspective about the need to contain and destroy it remained the same. Why do you think this is?
10 HUAC - The Hollywood Blacklist To view some actual footage from some of HUAC’s hearings, watch this short, informative video: Did Anti-Communist Measures at the Onset of the Cold War Threaten Civil Liberties and Domestic Freedoms in the United States?
14 Analyzing Cold War Strategies The United States utilized a variety of strategies to contain communism and advance their interests during the Cold War. Can you match the event with the strategy?
What were the signiﬁcant social, political, economic, and cultural readjustments that occurred in the U.S. after WWII and the 1950s?
Could the 1950s be considered a time of social, political, economic, and cultural prosperity and challenge simultaneously?
Did every American have equal access to the attainment of the “American Dream” of the 1950s?
How did the emergence of suburbia and the automobile culture impact lives of Americans in diﬀerent ways?
How signiﬁcant was the new era of mass media on American life in the 1950s?
Why did the emergence of “subcultures” occur when they did?
How did the birth of rock and roll blur racial lines and lead to advancements in ending certain types of segregation across the nation?
What social, political, economic, and cultural factors led to the increasingly wide gap between white, middle class Americans and those living in the “other America?
1 Living in the 1950s This video will give you an overview of life in the 1950s. Interactive 9.2 What are Conglomerates?
3 Large and Small Businesess in the 1950s An example of what this looked like from the business standpoint in the 1950s is illustrated in this video. Interactive 9.4 How do Franchises Work?
What were some of the “ﬁrsts” that occurred during the 1960 election?
Did President Kennedy’s actions in dealing with leaders of Cuba, U.S.S.R. and Germany reinforce public criticism that he was too inexperienced in foreign aﬀairs or did his actions prove them wrong?
To what extent did the Kennedy mystique contribute to the President’s approval rating?
What programs did John F . Kennedy create that helped various groups of Americans?
How did Kennedy’s foreign policy philosophy impact his domestic agenda?
How did Kennedy’s New Frontier create opportunities for all Americans?
What programs of President Johnson’s Great Society assisted certain groups of Americans?
How did Johnson’s Great Society create opportunities for all Americans?
How were the decisions of the Warren Court reﬂective of the dominant political climate during the Johnson administration?
In what ways were Kennedy’s foreign policy strategies similar to and diﬀerent from those of his predecessor, President Eisenhower?
Was President Kennedy’s philosophy on how to “win” the Cold War in sync with the American public?
He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1937 and the Senate in 1948. Known as having limitless ambition and drive, the legendary Texan had been selected as John F . Kennedy’s vice presidential nominee to help bring the southern Democrat vote in the 1960 election. After being sworn in as the thirty-sixth president after the assassination of Kennedy, Johnson stayed true to Kennedy’s plan. As a master of politics and political party maneuvering which usually took place behind the scenes, Johnson was the key ﬁgure in helping Congress draft and pass an $11 billion tax cut in February of 1964. In July of 1964, Johnson was again successful in persuading Southern democrats to stop blocking the passage of the Civil Rights legislation and on July 2nd, signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law. Viewed by many as one of the most important achievements of the civil rights era, the act prohibited discrimination in public accommodations, housing, and jobs based on race, religion, national origin, and gender. Additionally, the act granted new power to the federal government to enforce the act’s provisions. As President Johnson was well aware of the many other types of discrimination that plagued the country during this decade, he was a great supporter of the passage of the 24th Amendment to the Constitution which prohibited the use of a poll tax in federal elections. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1.What programs of President Johnson’s Great Society assisted certain groups of Americans?
To what extent did the government- sponsored programs of Johnson’s Great Society prompt far-reaching and long- lasting social change?
How did domestic programs under John F . Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson beneﬁt various groups of Americans?
To what extent did American foreign policy impact the domestic programs of Kennedy and Johnson?
To what extent were the domestic programs under Kennedy and Johnson a continuation of the New Deal programsestablished by President Roosevelt?
How did diﬀerent groups react to changes in American society?
How did the second women’s movement increase rights for women?
How did rights increase for disabled Americans?
How did the second women’s movementincrease rights for women?
How did rights increase for disabledAmericans?
4 Painter and McLaurin v. Segregation/Integration Oklahoma State Regents, the NAACP legal team led by future Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall, devised a plan to begin challenging and dismantling the “separate but equal” precedent established by the Plessy ruling, placing the organization’s limited resources in the direction of desegregating public education. Read each argument and drag it to the appropriate side. The legal dismantling of the “separate but equal” precedent established by the Plessy decision made huge gains in 1954 with the Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. The case centered around Linda Brown and her family’s struggle, along with twenty other African American families, who were denied admission to the elementary school in her neighborhood because they were African American. The court ruled 9-0 in favor of the Brown family, and African American families nationwide, when Chief Justice Earl Warren stated in his majority opinion that “separate is inherently unequal.” De Jure segregation was now unconstitutional under the law, but the battle of undoing what had been established by the Plessy decision was only just beginning. Excerpts from majority opinions Brown v. Board of Education: “We come then to the question presented: Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical facilities and other "tangible" factors may be equal, deprive the children of the minority group of equal educational opportunities?
5 Linking High School, she set out alone to walk Past to Present to school. Encountering an abusive crowd of students and adults, Eckford was ﬁnally able to make it to a bus stop where she waited until the bus arrived. Until the situation in Little Rock, President Eisenhower had taken very Read the article above and write a brief paragraph explain-little public stance on the matter of ing whether or not you agree enforcing the Brown decision, or civil with Carlotta Walls LaNeir’s position that the issue over rights in general. After Governor transgender bathroom use Faubus utilized the National Guard to marks a step backwards in his- resist the mandate handed down by tory?
Look at the chart below to obtain a sense of the extent of racial disturbances in a time period of less than four years during the 1960s. Questions to think about with regard to race riots throughout the nation’s history: Is there a certain time of year where rioting has more frequently occurred?
17 Schlaﬂy v Friedan: Who is right?
19 Timelinegroups from 1950 through the 1980s, of Civil Rightsanswer the following questions. 1. What inferences can you make about minority movements expansion of civil rights to those of the African American Civil Rights Movement?
Under what circumstances were the French ousted from Vietnam post-WWII?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unr est within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the globalstruggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the ColdW ar responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs. congressionalauthority during wartime?
Why was the TET Oﬀensive in 1968 considered the turning point of the war?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actionsby American soldiers constitute war crimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end thewar in V ietnam through “peace with honor?
What ramiﬁcations of the Vietnam War are still evident in American society today?
In what ways was the government of President Diemr esponsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as acomponent in the global struggle between communism anddemocracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism anddemocracy during the Cold W ar responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs.congressional authority during wartime?
Why was the TET Oﬀensive in 1968 considered the turning pointof the war?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam,why did some actions by American soldiers constitute warcrimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the Americanpeople to end the war in V ietnam through “peace with honor?
What ramiﬁcations of the Vietnam War are still evident inAmerican society today?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the global struggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the Cold War responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs. congressional authority during wartime?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actions by American soldiers constitute war crimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end the war in Vietnam through “peace with honor?
25 greater than that of Michigan. Vietnam has highlands, valleys in many areas in the north and center of the country and a massive river delta in the South. Parts of the year and depending on location, there are massive monsoon rains. US Troops were asked to accomplish a diﬃcult task. In a conﬂict where it is a challenge to tell ally from foe, how does one know who the enemy is?
12 Troop Through the bombing of Timeline neighboring countries, Nixon wanted the North Vietnamese that even though U.S. troops were being withdrawn, he was capable of anything. It was this policy that critics would argue prolonged the war for several additional years, many of which were bloody. Perspective From the Home Front Even though Nixon had been in oﬃce for less than a year, he felt it was important to seek support for his policies in Vietnam. He appealed to what he called the If needed, review this interactive timeline from earlier in the chapter. silent majority--moderate, mainstream Americans who quietly supported his strategies. Nixon’s “Silent Majority” Speech November 3, 1969 Good evening, my fellow Americans: Tonight I want to talk to you on a subject of deep concern to all Americans and to many people in all parts of the world -- the war in Vietnam. I believe that one of the reasons for the deep division about Vietnam is that many Americans have lost conﬁdence in what their Government has told them about our policy. The American people cannot and should not be asked to support a policy which involves the overriding issues of war and peace unless they know the truth about that policy. Tonight, therefore, I would like to answer some of the questions that I know are on the minds of many of you listening to me. Let us all understand that the question before us is not whether some Americans are for peace and some Americans are against peace. The question at issue is not whether Johnson’s war becomes Nixon's war. The great question is: How can we win America’s peace?
