According to the cartoon, where did women experience early success in gaining suﬀrage?
What part did the League of Nations play in the shift toward isolationism by the U.S. after WWI?
What is the main argument presented by the cartoonist?
What were the causes of the American policy of containment?
What can we learn today from American action and inaction in the face of the refugee crisis in spring 1939 and the deportation of Hungarian Jews ﬁve years later?
Did every American have equal access to the attainment of the “American Dream” of the 1950s?
How did diﬀerent groups react to changes in American society?
What inferences can you make about minority movements expansion of civil rights to those of the African American Civil Rights Movement?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actions by American soldiers constitute war crimes?
To what extent did American foreign policy impact the domestic programs of Kennedy and Johnson?
What are the circumstances that would have led to the creation of the cartoon?
Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
How did environmental factors aﬀect the Great Depression?
What inventions greatly changed how Americans work?
What was Eisenhower's role?
What words are being stepped over by John Bull (England) and Uncle Sam (United States)?
Why was the TET Oﬀensive in 1968 considered the turning point of the war?
What are some of the symbols that are critical to understanding the political cartoon?
In what ways were Kennedy’s foreign policy strategies similar to and diﬀerent from those of his predecessor, President Eisenhower?
In what ways did the arts of the Harlem Renaissance break down racial boundaries?
The economy grew at 4.2% Gross National Product (GNP) on average, each year of the decade. America had become an urban nation where urban centers and cities were the place many wanted to be. As cities rose to prominence in the eyes of many, small town attitudes had lost their hold on the predominating culture. As many moved into the booming cities like New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago, changes in thinking had to accompany changes to everyday living. This was diﬃcult for many as they experienced a moral and sometimes cultural tug-of-war between small town safety and close ties to others, hard work, and strict morals and that of anonymous crowds, money makers, and pleasure seekers of larger cities. The conﬂicts of the 1920s pitted a more modernist, urban culture against a more traditionalist, rural culture. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
What are the strengths of the infographic?
To what degree was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny?
Look at the chart below to obtain a sense of the extent of racial disturbances in a time period of less than four years during the 1960s. Questions to think about with regard to race riots throughout the nation’s history: Is there a certain time of year where rioting has more frequently occurred?
To what extent did the contradiction between agriculture and business contribute to economic bust by the end of the decade?
To what extent should the victors of a war be permitted to structure a post-war peace?
Are there any errors in the infographic?
At the Republican convention, when Taft’s supporters refused to unseat him as the incumbent, Roosevelt’s supporters held their own convention a month later in August of 1912. The Progressive Party became known as the Bull Moose Party after Roosevelt had boasted that he was “as strong as a bull moose.” The split in the Republican party between Taft’s conservative supporters and Roosevelt’s progressives split the Republican vote, thus handing the presidency to Woodrow Wilson--the ﬁrst Democratic president since the election of Grover Cleveland in 1892. 70 1. What does this cartoon suggest about Taft’s administration?
This law’s aim was to curb the tide of immigrants by setting a yearly constraint of immigrants entering the country to 350,000. The law further went on to restrict immigration of each nationality to 3 percent of the 1910 U.S. census ﬁgures. In 1924 the Emergency Quota Act was strengthened to completely exclude Japanese immigrants to the United States. Laws passed reﬂecting Anti-Asian sentiment was nothing new. The Emergency Quota Act continued an earlier trend established in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Legislation, such as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the Gentleman’s Agreement of 1907, put restrictions speciﬁcally on Japanese immigrants. Pressure from labor groups helped to validate laws during the 1920s designed to speciﬁcally exclude Asian immigrants. 147 Interactive 5.5 Says the Foreigner Is Not Appreciated Why would labor groups pressure the government to pass laws like the Emergency Quota Act of 1921?
In March of 1933, it is estimated that ﬁfteen and one half million American workers were unemployed. The Impact of the Depression in Cities In cities across the country, many Americans were unable to provide for themselves and their families. Destitute and unable to pay their mortgages, some Americans suddenly found themselves without work and homeless. Before long, “Hoovervilles” or shantytowns--small towns consisting largely of shacks emerged on the outskirts of cities. While some consisted of only a few families, others grew to the point where they functioned like communities. For some quick but interesting facts about shantytowns during the Depression visit this site: Daily, the urban poor could be found scrounging throughout the city, searching for food by digging through garbage cans or, in some cases, begging on street corners. In the absence of government relief programs, people could also be seen waiting in long lines, commonly known as “bread lines,” in order to receive nourishment. With so many Americans living in poverty, community organizations began to open soup kitchens to feed the hungry. 172Interactive 6.2 Crash Course - the Great Depression Learn more in this video from John Green Interactive 6.3 Shanty Town Facts Learn more at this website from American Historama. Interactive 6.4 Brother Can You Spare A Dime?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end the war in Vietnam through “peace with honor?
What ramiﬁcations of the Vietnam War are still evident in American society today?
Hitler used the results of the popular vote and his rising political inﬂuence to demand that he be installed as chancellor of Germany. After the Reichstag ﬁre was blamed on communists, he persuaded the German president, the German people, and the Nazi Party-controlled Reichstag to grant him “emergency powers” necessary to protect the country. He suspended civil liberties and began the process of purging Germany of anyone who might oppose him. The communist party was banned, while freedom of the press and of assembly were denied. A month later, another act was passed which gave Hitler powers to bypass both the Reichstag and the country’s constitution. With his power expanding, Hitler had his enemies, rivals, and even former friends murdered in 1934 in what became known as “Night of the Long Knives.” When the German president died later that summer, Hitler assumed full dictatorial 204Interactive 7.7 How did Hitler Rise to Power?
What were the signiﬁcant social, political, economic, and cultural readjustments that occurred in the U.S. after WWII and the 1950s?
Under what circumstances is it morally acceptable to bomb civilians during a war?
The massive assault into Soviet territory was composed of the largest military force ever assembled: 3 million troops, 625,000 horses, 3350 tanks, and 2,270 aircraft. Despite Allied warnings, the Soviets were caught unprepared. The seemingly unstoppable German troops blitzkreiged their way into heart of the Soviet Union throughout the summer of 1941. Churchill and Roosevelt Establish Allied War Goals Meanwhile, in preparation for war, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston Churchill gathered for a secret meeting aboard the USS Augusta oﬀ the coast of Newfoundland. There, the two leaders forged the Atlantic Charter, a document that contained the major goals that would govern Allied aims throughout the war. The document, which echoed many of Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points from World War I, proclaimed that the Allies would seek no territorial gains and would promote principles that would reﬂect their “hopes for a better world.” The Atlantic Charter would serve as the foundation upon which the United Nations would be constructed at the end of the war, replacing the broken and ineﬀective League of Nations. Primary Source Analysis: The Atlantic Charter 1. Do a close reading of the Atlantic Charter. 2. What are the principles of the Charter that Churchill and Wilson thought would bring about “a better world”?
How did urban development change the landscape of America?
What is the message that Dr. Seuss is attempting to get across to the audience?
What factors contributed to the Cold War?
What kinds of technological weapons are morally acceptable and what kinds are not?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the global struggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
What countries seemed to have lost the most territory?
Describe the objects or people in the cartoon.2. What symbols can you identify?
How did physical geography impact industrial growth?
Why types of laws seemed most common?
To what extent did the Kennedy mystique contribute to the President’s approval rating?
At what point can fear lead to infringement upon an individual or group’s civil liberties?
How did World War II change the foreign policy of the United States?
How did American civic values contribute to the role the U.S. home front played during WWII?
To what extent did government interact with the economy?
What does Roosevelt’s response seem to be?
What changes do you see on the 1923 map?
Section 2 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Why were the 1890s a turning point in American foreign policy history?
Were Wilson’s 14 Points idealistic or realistic?
Could the 1950s be considered a time of social, political, economic, and cultural prosperity and challenge simultaneously?
In what ways did the emergence of the double standard reﬂect the broader struggle for women between traditional and modern societal and cultural standards?
If the Nazi medical experiments produced medical data that would be useful for today's researchers, would it be ethical to use that data?
How did labor change and stay the same from pre- Industrial Revolution to during the Industrial Revolution?
Compare the various nationalities portrayed in the cartoon. What impressions might such portrayals leave with the audience?
How did tycoons inﬂuence the growth of corporations?
Why did the emergence of “subcultures” occur when they did?
Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
Interactive 7.20 Declaration of War Against the US To read Hitler’s speech declaring war on the United States, click here. Interactive 7.21 State of the World Pre-WW2 How powerful were the military powers of the US, Nazi Germany, and Japan prior to Pearl Harbor?
To what extent did labor beneﬁt from the Industrial Revolution?
For whom would the cartoon have been created?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and whatwere pros and cons associated with hisresponse?
What is the subject of the political cartoon?
What laws most disturbed you?
What is the purpose of the cartoon?
How are the techniques used in this poster similar to techniques used today?
Was it the right decision for the U.S. Government to bring Nazi rocket scientists to the U.S. to help develop the American space program?
What are its weaknesses?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish- American War?
People then, as well as today, migrated for many reasons. The reasons that people move are categorized as push and pull factors. Welcome to America When immigrants entered the US, they did through two major entry points: Angel Island in California and Ellis Island in New York. The majority of European immigrants arrived in New York and Asian immigrants arrived in California. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. How did physical geography impact industrial growth?
How did the birth of rock and roll blur racial lines and lead to advancements in ending certain types of segregation across the nation?
Does the poster appeal more to reason or to emotions?
Under what circumstances were the French ousted from Vietnam post-WWII?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the Cold War responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
Why were the 1890s a turning point in American foreign policy history?
From a political and economic perspective, were the actions of government and business seen as more conservative or innovative during this decade?
To what extent did growing venues of mass media shape a mass culture?
Would the alliance of Axis powers have happened if the U.S. had not adopted a policy of Isolationism?
How did domestic programs under John F . Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson beneﬁt various groups of Americans?
What is the subject of the infographic?
How did economic, political, social/ cultural choices made a decade earlier contribute to the start of the Great Depression?
This ﬁrst model ran on ethanol fuel and used bicycle tires for wheels. Seven years later, Henry Ford found the Ford Motor Company in Detroit, Michigan. In 1908, the Ford Motor Company produced the famous Model-T which served as the basis for autos in the future. 14Interactive 1.2 Gospel of Wealth Excerpt from “Gospel of Wealth” Read here: historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5766/ 1) How does Andrew Carnegie view the role of the wealthy?
The NAACP and the Campaign Against Lynching As a result of the alarm to African-Americans caused by the race riots, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) undertook an anti-lynching campaign. The NAACP worked through the court system to gain civil rights protections for African-Americans. Under the leadership of Executive Secretary James Weldon Johnson the group supported an anti-lynching bill Section 5 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
What challenges did America face in governing an empire?
What were the goals of reformers?
To what extent was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny in the 1840s?
Who is the intended audience of the cartoon?
Detroit’s location, situated on the international border with Canada, with only the Detroit River separating the two countries, provided the perfect opportunity for organized crime to ﬂourish. Seventy-ﬁve percent of all alcohol smuggled into the United States during prohibition, came across the Detroit River from Canada. The Purple Gang, led by the Bernstein brothers, took advantage of the situation and controlled smuggling and distribution operations in Detroit throughout the decade of the 1920s. Al Capone, one of the most infamous gangsters during the prohibition era, counted on Detroit’s Purple Gang to supply his mob with illegal alcohol. Instead of curing many of society’s ills, it soon became clear that prohibition was having the opposite eﬀect, leading to a rise in violence and crime and a breakdown of order. Instead of stopping the production, sale and distribution of alcohol, prohibition pushed the manufacture and drinking of alcohol underground, often accompanied by devastating outcomes. People began to make their own alcohol, known as “bathtub gin” or “moonshine” in their homes. Bootleggers also tried to stretch their supply of alcohol by diluting it with substances such as wood alcohol, rubbing alcohol, or other lethal chemicals that could lead to ailments from blindness to death. Organized Crime In addition to disrespect for the law that prohibition helped to create, there were other harmful eﬀects as well. The most harmful eﬀect was the ﬂow of money away from lawful or law-abiding businesses and into organized crime. In almost every major city, the opportunity to make and sell liquor at an enormously high proﬁt rate was seized by underground gangs. Chicago for example, was known as the most corrupt and crime-ridden cities in America not only in the 1920s but the 1930s as well. 154 What role did geography play in Chicago’s emergence as one of the most corrupt cities in America during the 1920s?
How did the emergence of suburbia and the automobile culture impact lives of Americans in diﬀerent ways?
How did the government interact with big business?
Assuring the country that World War I was being fought for a moral cause and for a lasting, postwar peace in Europe, Wilson outlined his Fourteen Points. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
What is the subject of the poster?
What challenges did American society face?
The Soviets had also disagreed bitterly with the United States and Britain about tactics Section 1 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. What factors contributed to the Cold War?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish-American War?
What were the major turning points of the war in each theater of war?
How did the role of technology aﬀect the outcome of World War II?
Accessed through The Janet A. Ginsburg Chicago Tribune Collection, Michigan State Library Based on what is depicted in this cartoon, why does the author think that prohibition is a failure?
How did rights increase for disabled Americans?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros andcons associated with his response?
What songs are you familiar with?
What can be learned about the changes in American character from the manner in which the U.S. mobilized, prepared, and participated in a world war both at home and abroad?
How did the geography of Europe impact WWI warfare?
Did the short-term victories of the labor movement in the 1920s ultimately help or hinder its long-term goals?
While oﬃcially remaining neutral, the United States was preparing for war. Political Cartoon Analysis Ho Hum! No chance of contagion. (appeared in May 1941) 1. What is the subject of the political cartoon?
How did the Great Depression aﬀect American citizens?
Should a doctor use his or her medical knowledge to assist the military or government design physical or mental techniques for interrogating prisoners of war?
What are the sources for the infographic?
What principals are similar to Wilson’s Fourteen Points?
How did the second women’s movement increase rights for women?
Technology Gives Allies the Upper Hand in the Battle of the Atlantic In the North Atlantic, technological advancements helped to counter the German U-Boat threat to Allied supply lines. Radar, which had been used so eﬀectively to intercept German planes over Great Britain in 1940, was now used in planes to detect German U-Boats on the surface of the Atlantic. For U-Boats patrolling below Section 5 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. What were the causes of World War II?
What were the causes of World War II?
How did inventions impact demands for labor?
The Knights championed both skilled and unskilled 22Two young children work in a textile mill. Source: Library of Congress Source: 0809222299/45391/USChart2.jpg 1) What does this graph tell you about how Americans lived and worked?
How signiﬁcant was the new era of mass media on American life in the 1950s?
How many people were displaced?
Is the argument convincing?
What social, political, economic, and cultural factors led to the increasingly wide gap between white, middle class Americans and those living in the “other America?
By the time the United States joined the conﬂict, Europe had already been embroiled in a bitter stalemate for just over three years, leading to hundreds of thousands of casualties,both military and civilian. While eager to join the ﬁght to support the Allies, Wilson knew that in order for U.S. troops to be successful in Europe, a wartime mentality would need to be developed and strengthened not only among soldiers but among all Americans on the homefront. Revving up the American “war machine” would require a lot of work. Opposition to the War While Wilson was quite certain that he could secure the approval of Congress, he did anticipate dissent. He didn’t have to wait long. At 1:00 a.m. on April 6, 1917, after 15 hours of debating President Wilson’s request for a declaration of war against Germany, a roll call vote began in the U.S. House of Representatives. When the clerk of the House came upon the name of Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the ﬁrst woman elected to Congress stood up and declared, “I want to stand by my country but I cannot vote for war. I vote no.” In later years she reﬂected on this action by saying, “I believe that the ﬁrst vote I cast was the most signiﬁcant vote and a most signiﬁcant act on the part of women, because women are going to have to stop war. I felt at the time that the ﬁrst woman [in Congress] Section 2 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the civic values of the Axis powers diﬀer from the core democratic values of the United States?
What does the newscaster explain to calm the public’s fears?
How did Americans respond to these challenges?
How did race, gender and social status aﬀect American politics?
What issue is this political cartoon about?
What is the cartoonist’s opinion or message on this issue?
What techniques are being used in the poster to create a response in the reader?
What evidence does the cartoonist present for his argument?
Is it heroic to use new weapons technologies that allow people to kill from a distance, without ever seeing their enemies?
Who created it and why?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs. congressional authority during wartime?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros and cons associated with his response?
To what extent were the domestic programs under Kennedy and Johnson a continuation of the New Deal programsestablished by President Roosevelt?
Could steps have been taken by the Allies that would have prevented or greatly reduced the impact of the Holocaust?
What is the cartoonist’s perspective on assistance for Cuba?
He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1937 and the Senate in 1948. Known as having limitless ambition and drive, the legendary Texan had been selected as John F . Kennedy’s vice presidential nominee to help bring the southern Democrat vote in the 1960 election. After being sworn in as the thirty-sixth president after the assassination of Kennedy, Johnson stayed true to Kennedy’s plan. As a master of politics and political party maneuvering which usually took place behind the scenes, Johnson was the key ﬁgure in helping Congress draft and pass an $11 billion tax cut in February of 1964. In July of 1964, Johnson was again successful in persuading Southern democrats to stop blocking the passage of the Civil Rights legislation and on July 2nd, signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law. Viewed by many as one of the most important achievements of the civil rights era, the act prohibited discrimination in public accommodations, housing, and jobs based on race, religion, national origin, and gender. Additionally, the act granted new power to the federal government to enforce the act’s provisions. As President Johnson was well aware of the many other types of discrimination that plagued the country during this decade, he was a great supporter of the passage of the 24th Amendment to the Constitution which prohibited the use of a poll tax in federal elections. Section 3 QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1.What programs of President Johnson’s Great Society assisted certain groups of Americans?
What is the occasion of the cartoon?
How is the subject of the poster being used to promote the war eﬀort?
