How did physical geography impact industrial growth?
How did tycoons inﬂuence the growth of corporations?
How did inventions impact demands for labor?
How did the government interact with big business?
How did urban development change the landscape of America?
How did race, gender and social status aﬀect American politics?
How do the maps above demonstrate that the United States was geographically ready for the Industrial Revolution?
How does Andrew Carnegie view the role of the wealthy?
How does Andrew Carnegie view charity?
What part of the American identity does Carnegie emphasize in this document?
How does this document reﬂect the "Forty-Millionaire Carnegie in his Great Double Role" political cartoon?
How does the population growth in Detroit reﬂect the growth of the Auto Industry?
How did labor change and stay the same from pre- Industrial Revolution to during the Industrial Revolution?
What inventions greatly changed how Americans work?
To what extent did labor beneﬁt from the Industrial Revolution?
To what extent did government interact with the economy?
The Cross of Gold Speech Check out an excerpt of the “Cross of Gold Speech” here! What grievances does William Jennings Bryan address in this speech?
How does he compare farmers to those on the Atlantic Coast?
How does this speech represent the goals of the Populist Party?
Think Geography! Why would more Asian immigrants enter through California, while more European immigrants came in through New York?
What challenges did American society face?
How did Americans respond to these challenges?
What were the goals of reformers?
How are the articles in the gallery above examples of Muckraking?
What potential problems can you identify in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory that may have contributed to the death of so many workers?
How has the Food and Drug Administration evolved since its creation?
Use the interactive map to identify examples of Jim Crow laws. 1. What laws most disturbed you?
What law surprised you the most?
Why types of laws seemed most common?
Listen to personal narratives from individuals that experienced Jim Crow ﬁrsthand. What challenges did these individuals face?
NAACP that emerged was Booker T. Washington, an African American educator. He founded the Tuskegee Institute, which was a vocational school for African Americans in the south. He believed that African Americans Explore the NAACP website and identify the issues they are addressing today. How are these challenges similar to and diﬀerent from those faced during the Progressive Era?
You Decide: Booker T. Washington or W.E.B. DuBois?
Some of LaFollette’s views are still debates occurring today. Where do you fall on these issues?
How did Teddy Bears Get Their Names?
What does Roosevelt’s response seem to be?
Why were the 1890s a turning point in American foreign policy history?
To what degree was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish- American War?
What challenges did America face in governing an empire?
Were Wilson’s 14 Points idealistic or realistic?
What were the causes and consequences of the Spanish-American War?
To what extent was American expansion in the 1890s a continuation of manifest destiny in the 1840s?
In American political cartoons, Uncle Sam and Columbia have often been used to represent the United States. In this cartoon, Uncle Sam refers to the U.S. government, while Columbia is representative of the American people. What are some of the symbols that are critical to understanding the political cartoon?
What is the cartoonist’s perspective on assistance for Cuba?
Describe the objects or people in the cartoon.2. What words are being stepped over by John Bull (England) and Uncle Sam (United States)?
What issue is this political cartoon about?
For what reasons was imperialism supported by some and opposed by others?
Following America’s acquisition of Cuba and Puerto Rico, the debate as to whether the Constitution followed the ﬂag raged fully. How well did America live up to those ideals of an “empire of liberty” in the Caribbean while projecting its power?
Presidential Policy Toward Latin America. Can you identify the policies?
Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U.S.today?
What can be learned about the changes in American character from the manner in which the U.S. mobilized, prepared, and participated in a world war both at home and abroad?
How did the geography of Europe impact WWI warfare?
To what extent should the victors of a war be permitted to structure a post-war peace?
Do you ever wonder why Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) volunteers give you a paper poppy after you give them a donation?
From a political and economic perspective, were the actions of government and business seen as more conservative or innovative during the 1920s?
What part did the League of Nations play in the shift toward isolationism by the U.S. after WWI?
At what point can fear lead to infringement upon an individual or group’s civil liberties?
Did the short-term victories of the labor movement in the 1920s ultimately help or hinder its long-term goals?
To what extent did the contradiction between agriculture and business contribute to economic bust by the end of the decade?
Why would labor groups pressure the government to pass laws like the Emergency Quota Act of 1921?
In what ways did the emergence of the double standard reﬂect the broader struggle for women between traditional and modern societal and cultural standards?
To what extent did growing venues of mass media shape a mass culture?
In what ways did the arts of the Harlem Renaissance break down racial boundaries?
What role did geography play in Chicago’s emergence as one of the most corrupt cities in America during the 1920s?
Did the majority of the social and cultural changes that took place in the 1920s reinforce traditional values or represent a shift more reﬂective of modern thoughts and ideas?
How did economic, political, social/ cultural choices made a decade earlier contribute to the start of the Great Depression?
How did environmental factors aﬀect the Great Depression?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros andcons associated with his response?
How did the Great Depression aﬀect American citizens?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and whatwere pros and cons associated with hisresponse?
What Caused the Great Depression?
How did the government under Hoover react to the Great Depression and what were pros and cons associated with his response?
What were the causes of World War II?
How did the civic values of the Axis powers diﬀer from the core democratic values of the United States?
Would the alliance of Axis powers have happened if the U.S. had not adopted a policy of Isolationism?
How did American civic values contribute to the role the U.S. home front played during WWII?
Could steps have been taken by the Allies that would have prevented or greatly reduced the impact of the Holocaust?
What were the major turning points of the war in each theater of war?
How did the role of technology aﬀect the outcome of World War II?
How did World War II change the foreign policy of the United States?
What changes do you see on the 1923 map?
What countries seemed to have lost the most territory?
How did the Versailles Treaty Change the World?
How did Hitler Rise to Power?
Do a close reading of the Atlantic Charter. What are the principles of the Charter that Churchill and Wilson thought would bring about “a better world”?
What principals are similar to Wilson’s Fourteen Points?
How powerful were the military powers of the US, Nazi Germany, and Japan prior to Pearl Harbor?
A Japanese Interment Story Local San Diego born and raised, Japanese Internment survivor Ruth Voorhies tells her experience during World War 2 when her family was placed in the Poston Arizona Japanese Internment camp. The experience was a tragic event that never should have happened and was a violation of American rights. Was the conduct of the United States during WWII consistent with its values?
What kinds of technological weapons are morally acceptable and what kinds are not?
Under what circumstances is it morally acceptable to bomb civilians during a war?
Was it the right decision for the U.S. Government to bring Nazi rocket scientists to the U.S. to help develop the American space program?
If the Nazi medical experiments produced medical data that would be useful for today's researchers, would it be ethical to use that data?
Should a doctor use his or her medical knowledge to assist the military or government design physical or mental techniques for interrogating prisoners of war?
Is it heroic to use new weapons technologies that allow people to kill from a distance, without ever seeing their enemies?
What can we learn today from American action and inaction in the face of the refugee crisis in spring 1939 and the deportation of Hungarian Jews ﬁve years later?
On May 7, 1945 it was announced that Germany had unconditionally surrendered to the Allies. What was Eisenhower's role?
5-2 million would not or could not return home. Destruction of homes and entire communities made it impossible for some to return home and in other places pogroms were initiated to keep Jews from resettling in Eastern Europe. Because of this many Jewish refugees moved from Poland to the Western European countries. There were also committees established at this time that were promoting the idea of creating a Jewish homeland in Palestine. Read page of one the document below written in 1950. Answer the following: 1. How many people were displaced? Where have most displaced persons resettled?
What factors contributed to the Cold War?
What were the causes of the American policy of containment?
What issues are the United Nations working on today?
What are some of the diﬀerences between capitalism and communism?
The Truman Doctrine and Marshall Plan have often been called “two halves of the same walnut”, different in many ways but sharing the same purpose. Can you identify the similarities and differences between the two plans?
What is NATO?
Although communism took different forms in the Soviet Union and China, the United States perspective about the need to contain and destroy it remained the same. Why do you think this is?
Did Anti-Communist Measures at the Onset of the Cold War Threaten Civil Liberties and Domestic Freedoms in the United States?
What were the signiﬁcant social, political, economic, and cultural readjustments that occurred in the U.S. after WWII and the 1950s?
Could the 1950s be considered a time of social, political, economic, and cultural prosperity and challenge simultaneously?
Did every American have equal access to the attainment of the “American Dream” of the 1950s?
How did the emergence of suburbia and the automobile culture impact lives of Americans in diﬀerent ways?
How signiﬁcant was the new era of mass media on American life in the 1950s?
Why did the emergence of “subcultures” occur when they did?
How did the birth of rock and roll blur racial lines and lead to advancements in ending certain types of segregation across the nation?
What social, political, economic, and cultural factors led to the increasingly wide gap between white, middle class Americans and those living in the “other America?
What are Conglomerates?
How do Franchises Work?
What were some of the “ﬁrsts” that occurred during the 1960 election?
Did President Kennedy’s actions in dealing with leaders of Cuba, U.S.S.R. and Germany reinforce public criticism that he was too inexperienced in foreign aﬀairs or did his actions prove them wrong?
To what extent did the Kennedy mystique contribute to the President’s approval rating?
What programs did John F . Kennedy create that helped various groups of Americans?
How did Kennedy’s foreign policy philosophy impact his domestic agenda?
How did Kennedy’s New Frontier create opportunities for all Americans?
What programs of President Johnson’s Great Society assisted certain groups of Americans?
How did Johnson’s Great Society create opportunities for all Americans?
How were the decisions of the Warren Court reﬂective of the dominant political climate during the Johnson administration?
In what ways were Kennedy’s foreign policy strategies similar to and diﬀerent from those of his predecessor, President Eisenhower?
Was President Kennedy’s philosophy on how to “win” the Cold War in sync with the American public?
To what extent did the government- sponsored programs of Johnson’s Great Society prompt far-reaching and long- lasting social change?
How did domestic programs under John F . Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson beneﬁt various groups of Americans?
To what extent did American foreign policy impact the domestic programs of Kennedy and Johnson?
To what extent were the domestic programs under Kennedy and Johnson a continuation of the New Deal programs established by President Roosevelt?
How did diﬀerent groups react to changes in American society?
How did the second women’s movement increase rights for women?
How did rights increase for disabled Americans?
How did the second women’s movement increase rights for women?
How did rights increase for disabledAmericans?
Write a brief paragraph explaining whether or not you agree with Carlotta Walls LaNeir’s position that the issue over transgender bathroom use marks a step backwards in history?
Questions to think about with regard to race riots throughout the nation’s history: Is there a certain time of year where rioting has more frequently occurred?
Schlaﬂy v Friedan: Who is right?
What inferences can you make about minority movements expansion of civil rights to those of the African American Civil Rights Movement?
Under what circumstances were the French ousted from Vietnam post-WWII?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the global struggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the Cold War responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs. congressional authority during wartime?
Why was the TET Oﬀensive in 1968 considered the turning point of the war?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actions by American soldiers constitute war crimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end the war in Vietnam through “peace with honor?
What ramiﬁcations of the Vietnam War are still evident in American society today?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the global struggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the Cold War responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs.congressional authority during wartime?
Why was the TET Oﬀensive in 1968 considered the turning point of the war?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actions by American soldiers constitute warcrimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end the war in Vietnam through “peace with honor?
What ramiﬁcations of the Vietnam War are still evident inAmerican society today?
In what ways was the government of President Diem responsible for the intensifying unrest within Vietnam?
How did the U.S. misinterpret Vietnam’s civil war as a component in the global struggle between communism and democracy that deﬁned the Cold War?
How were conﬂicting ideas between communism and democracy during the Cold War responsible for U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
How is the Vietnam War reﬂective of the issue of presidential vs. congressional authority during wartime?
If the U.S. was ﬁghting for freedom and democracy in Vietnam, why did some actions by American soldiers constitute war crimes?
Did President Nixon genuinely fulﬁll his promise to the American people to end the war in Vietnam through “peace with honor?