What is a primary source?
How do bias and point of view impact sources?
How does evidence support or refute arguments?
Popes of the Middle Ages served as both religious and political leaders. “It is not without cause that we are driven to express in strong terms our amazement that you, according to what we have heard, have invaded many countries belonging both to Christians and to others and are laying waste in a horrible desolation, and with a fury still unabated you do not cease from breaking the bonds of natural ties, sparing neither sex nor age, you rage against all indiscriminately with the sword of chastisement.” - Source: Pope Innocent IV. Is this source primary or secondary?
Based on document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse without the Mongols?
Are there key pieces of evidence from the document that support your claim?
Why might this letter from the Pope be considered by many as powerful?
This book serves as a record for Mongol and Asian history. “At every opportunity, he (the son of Genghis Khan) allowed his sublime thoughts to overﬂow lavishly into the most just and charitable of good deeds, into the eradication of injustice and enmity, into the development of cities and districts, as well as into the construction of various buildings. He never neglected any measure designed to strengthen the framework of peace, and to lay the foundation of prosperity. “ - Source: Rashid Al-Din, 1241 CE 1. Is this source primary or secondary?
Based on document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse o ﬀ without the Mongols?
Which document--1 or 2--seems to be the most reliable?
Does document 1 or 2 better corroborate the evidence provided in document 3?
Is this source primary or secondary?
Based on this document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse o ﬀ without the Mongols?
Which of the ﬁrst three documents best corroborates with document 4?
What does the chart tell you about the Mongols?
Are there key pieces of evidence from the document support your claim?
According to this source what role do Mongol women have in Mongol society?
Which document best corroborates document 6?
What key pieces of evidence from the document support your claim from above?
Is Morris Rossabi a reliable source?
What were the Four Zones of the world and what geographic advantages did Afro-Eurasia have over the rest of the world?
How were indigenous peoples aﬀected by exploration?
What were the Gunpowder Empires and how did they compare to their European and Asian counterparts?
Afro-Eurasia: Africa and the Eurasian landmass, including o ﬀshore islands like Britain and Japan 2. The Americas: North, Central, and South America, plus oﬀshore islands like the Caribbean 
Imagine the thoughts of the Europeans as they ﬁrst saw land in the “New World.” What do you think would have been their most immediate impression?
How many Indigenous people were alive in the Western Hemisphere in 1520 compared to 1550?
Hypothesize why people in the Western Hemisphere got ill, whereas it wasn’t the other way around?
What year had the lowest population of Indigenous people?
Smallpox was the disease that caused the most deaths. Are there any pandemics today that could have the same eﬀect?
How did the 16th century diﬀer from modern times?
Imagine what would happen if such a disease hit America?
Why do people explore?
What were the motives of European Exploration?
What factors encourage exploration?
What modern day country does Portugal maintain control of in the Americas?
Economically, what enabled the Dutch East India Company to be successful?
How did the Dutch East India Company act as a nation?
What role did violence play with the Dutch East India Company?
Which nation had the greatest impact on exploration and trade in Asia?
How were China and Japan similar and diﬀerent with their reactions to Europeans?
How does Cortes describe noche triste?
How would an Aztec viewpoint be diﬀerent?
The Incas declined after the arrival of Pizarro. Spain plundered and looted its wealth, Catholicism took over as religion and the Spanish language overtook their language. Questions: 1. What caused the decline of the Aztecs?
How did the Spanish incorporate Incan ways into ruling its empire in South America?
How did the inﬂux of silver hurt the Spanish economy?
How did Spain manage to go from the richest country in Europe to borrowing money?
How did the silver from the Americas impact the Chinese economy?
How does this map reﬂect who beneﬁted from the Age of Exploration?
Source: Major_religious_groups 1. Where has Christianity spread throughout the world?
What conclusions can you make based on where protestantism and catholicism spread throughout the world?
Why were African slaves used primarily for forced labor in the cotton and sugar plantations in the Americas?
Why was the Trans-Atlantic slave trade transformative to the economic way of life in the Americas?
How did African slavery in the New World diﬀer fundamentally from past instances of slavery and other systems of labor in the same era?
How did the geography of the region dictate the r ole of slaves?
What were the causes, conﬂicts, and consequences of the American Revolution?
How did the old social order demonstrate social inequities and how did those inequities contribute to the French Revolution?
In what ways did Napoleon’s leadership contribute to Enlightened ideals of revolution?
Did the beneﬁts of Napoleon’s political, social, and economic policies outweigh the costs of the French Revolution?
Were the revolutions that occurred in South America more similar to or diﬀerent than the American and French Revolutions?
What was trial by ﬁre?
What was trial by water?
What was trial by combat?
What were other types of medieval punishments and/or tortures?
How did Napoleon build up his reputation as a national hero?
Dark blue are areas directly controlled by France. Light Blue are sister states that are greatly inﬂuenced by France. What political practices of Napoleon reﬂected those of a monarchy?
Does Napoleon deserve to be called great?
What changes were made by the Congress of Vienna?
What were the political and economic impacts of the Industrial Revolution?
How and why did the Industrial Revolution cause shifts in population?
What new forms of technology propelled the Industrial Revolution?
How did the Industrial Revolution shape the distribution of global power?
How did the Industrial Revolution change society?
What were the consequences of political and nationalistic revolutions?
What factors contributed to the growth of nation-states and the rise of nationalism?
How did the growth of nation-states in Europe diﬀer from that in the rest of the world?
How was China weakened by European inﬂuence?
How did Japan build itself into a world power in a short time?
Write an essay that compares/contrasts the Opium War in China to what has happened in more modern times in Afghanistan. 
Deliberative assemblies shall be widely established and all matters decided by open discussion. 2. All classes, high and low, shall be united in vigorously carrying out the administration of aﬀ airs of state. 3. The common people, no less than the civil and military oﬃcials, shall all be allowed to pursue their own calling so that there may be no discontent. 4. Evil customs of the past shall be broken oﬀ and everything based upon the just laws of Nature. 5. Knowledge shall be sought throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundation of imperial rule. Questions: 1. What do you think the people of Japan thought about this document?
What did the authors mean by “deliberative assemblies” and “open discussion”?
How did competition with the West modernize Japan?
What is John’s deﬁnition of the modern nation-state?
How is public education often seen as as part of a nationalizing project?
What are some examples of conﬂicts that gave way to emerging nations?
Beginning in 1603 and lasting over 250 years, what was the main government of Japan and what did it oﬀer?
What warrior class was an odd feature of the Tokugawa era?
What two events rocked Japan and contributed to the crumbling of Tokugawa control in Japan?
What steps did a newly-throned Emperor Meiji and his leadership implement in order to unify Japan?
Why does John emphasize that when we rely on studying historical texts, we should note the origin, particularly those of European writers?
According to historians and Asian intellectuals, what reasons were given for European dominance over Asia?
What, if anything from western imperialism, do Asian communities borrow and integrate into their own communities?
Why did India struggle with the idea of nationalism?
What other factors ﬁnally made it possible for Europeans to colonize Asia?
What is “rule through and by the natives?
In colonized areas, why might native princes and landowners have put up with European imperialism?
Replay from 1800 to today. Stop at 1950 and think about the following important changes: Health improved everywhere. What were the important medical advances that happened around this time?
What health setback occurred across the world in the early 80s?
Can you delete the apps, and is the West in the process of doing so?
Can China do without app #3 (property rights)?
Explain which app you think is most important to achieving the level of prosperity of the United States and other Western nations?
How did Russia’s social structure and autocratic rule impact its economy?
What were some of the social and political problems that occurred as a result of Russia’s industrialization?
How did the events of Bloody Sunday mark a turning point for the Russian people?
How did political unrest increase after the Revolution of 1905?
What were some Parliamentary reforms in Britain between 1815-1848?
What values did Queen Victoria represent and how did these values relate to economic reform?
What were some of the biggest reforms in British politics under Benjamin Disraeli?
How did the series of social reforms in the mid 1800s reﬂect Queen Victoria’s values?
Whose assassination leads to the path of revolution in Russia?
Which groups worked to assassinate the tsar?
What was the issue the rebel groups had with the tsar’s government?
What was the goal the rebel groups hoped to accomplish?
How does the assassination impact that goal?
What were the political, cultural, and economic motives for imperialism in the 19th century?
Why were European powers able to spread imperialism through Africa, the Middle East, and Asia so quickly?
How did native peoples respond and or resist imperialism?
In the 19th Century, Why did Europe have to use silver in trade with China?
What did the Europeans ﬁnd that the Chinese could not refuse and thus upset the balance of trade (The balance of trade (BOT) is the diﬀerence between a country's imports and its exports for a given time period) in the Europeans favor?
How did the Chinese respond and resist Imperialism?
What were terms of Treaty of Nanjing?
What motivated Europeans to start colonies around the world?
Why did Europeans have to stick to the coast line until the late 19th Century?
What was the big game changer that allowed them to move into the interior of Africa?
How did African leaders respond and resist Imperialism?
How did Middle Eastern leaders respond and resist Imperialism?
What enabled European powers to advance and venture far across the sea and claim land?
What regions of the world did Spain take over?
What regions of the world did the Dutch take over?
What regions of the world did the British take over?
Why were Germany and Italy not as successful in setting up colonies overseas. 6. Why did Britain and France ﬁght many battles with each other?
How did a group of small countries (less than 5 percent of the world) claim the legal right to rule over more than 80 percent of the world?
To prevent conﬂict between Spain and Portugal, the Catholic Pope did what?
What was the immediate impact of Gandhi’s message?
What is historically happening at the time the document was created?
What legislation/event/person caused the document to be created?
What other major events/historical phenomena are happening at the time just before or after the document was created?
What is going on in the world at the time the document was created?
What were the long term consequences of his message?
What factors led to the Armenian genocide, and what were its eﬀects?
Ferdinand and his pregnant wife Sophie were killed by a gunman while in their car, ﬂeeing the city after a failed assassination attempt with a bomb earlier that day. The gunman was Gavrilo Princip, a 19-year-old 223Ethnic groups in the Balkans. Which argument do you ﬁnd the most compelling?
Germany declared war with Russia on August 1 and France two days later. The alliance system kicked in and declarations of war ensued from around the globe. The Great War had begun.The political cartoon above appeared in The Chicago Tribune in August 1914. What do you think the artist is trying to convey?
How do you think the sultan of the Ottoman Empire felt about this document?
If you were a Jewish person living in an Allied nation (such as Russia or the United States), would this declaration aﬀect your perception of the war eﬀort?
How do you predict this declaration will aﬀect Middle Eastern political relations and boundaries in the coming decades?
At what point does the extent of nationalism become harmful to the people of the nation?
What were some of the political, economic, and cultural ways of thinking that lead each of the countries in this chapter to adopt an extreme policy of nationalism?
Were the circumstances that brought about nationalism in each of the countries in this chapter similar?
What role did the U.S. play in strengthening Latin American nationalism?
Does nationalism always precede revolution or is it sometimes an after-eﬀect?
How did the Treaty of Versailles fail to meet Wilson’ s hope of a world safe for democracy?
In what ways did the League of Nations fail to halt political and military aggression?
How did worldwide economic depression shape the political landscape thr oughout Europe?
How did totalitarian regimes in the Soviet Union, Italy , Germany, and Japan come to power after WWI?
How and why did totalitarianism play out diﬀerently in Italy, Germany, and the Soviet Union and how did this lead to the outbreak of WWII?
Could the Soviet Government have declined such a proposal?
Why do you think Stalin gave this speech?
Using what you know about the character of Joseph Stalin, do you think this was an easy speech to deliver . Give reasoning for your answer. 
How does this image contradict the earlier image of Hitler and Stalin?
Highlight three excerpts in the passage that exemplify key characteristics of fascism. Identify which characteristics you chose. 
 How reliable is this source?
Why do you think Mussolini chose to write this when he did?
Is it signiﬁcant that the passage was written for an encyclopedia?
One of the more frustrating aspects of Versailles had been Italy’s failure to acquire any new colonies and Mussolini now intended to recreate the glories of the Roman Empire and achieve a ‘place in the sun’ to rival Britain and France. Further motives were the prospect of economic gains in the form of oil, coal and gold and of African recruits for the Italian army. Mussolini also thought of East Africa as a fertile area for Italian settlement, given the expected increase in population from the ‘Battle for Births’. Abyssinia was in any case the only remaining uncolonized African territory and seemed an easy target, given Italy’s military superiority and its presence in neighbouring Eritrea and Somaliland.” —Patricia Knight, 2003, excerpted from her book Mussolini and Fascism For each document: 1. What value does the author’s perspective provide for historians seeking information about Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia?
What limitations does the author’s perspective provide for historians seeking information about Italy’ s invasion of Ethiopia?
List three important details fr om the cartoon. 2. What message is the cartoon conveying?
The cartoon was originally published in 1930. What was happening in Germany and the world that would explain why the author chose to create this cartoon?
The man on the far left is Woodrow Wilson of the United States, seemingly trying to engage the others in conversation. Georges Clemenceau of France is holding the rope. David Lloyd George of Great Britain is holding a rolled up document, the Treaty of Versailles. A ﬁgure representing Germany is standing in front of the guillotine with his hands bound. • Thinking back to what you have lear ned about the end of World War I, what is signiﬁcant about the way each country is portrayed?
What relationship do you notice?
The caption read “They salute with both hands now!” 1. What type of imagery does the artist use?
How does the portrayal of Hitler and the men next to him diﬀer from the portrayal of the men in the crowd?
Note the caption. How does it expand your understanding of the cartoon?
Note that the cartoon was originally published in Britain. How does the country of origin a ﬀect the cartoon’s content?
List three important details from the cartoon. 2. What message is the cartoonist conveying?
How does the cartoon’s message relate to German foreign policy in the 1930s?
Why did fascist dictators see expansion from a territorial standpoint as a must in meeting their goals?
How did the policy of appeasement by Western democratic governments contribute to the beginning of World War II?
What policies, alliances, and actions contributed to the start ofWorld War II?
Why was the Jewish population viewed as such a threat to theNazi Party?
How did the results of the Holocaust play a major factor in how the map of the world would change?
How did the positions of armed forces at the end of the war lead to zones of occupation and competition for political inﬂuence amongst the former Allies?
How did the multitude of damages (social, political, economic, cultural) caused by WWII impact the geopolitical landscape throughout the world?
Why did fascist dictators see expansion from a territorial standpoint as a must in meeting their goals?
How did the policy of appeasement by Western democratic governments contribute to the beginning of World War II?
What policies, alliances, and actions contributed to the start of World War II?
Why was the Jewish population viewed as such a threat to the Nazi Party?
How did the results of the Holocaust play a major factor in how the map of the world would change?
How did the multitude of damages (social, political, economic, cultural) caused by WWII impact the geopolitical landscape throughout the world?
How did the policy of appeasement by Western democratic governments contribute to the beginning of World War II?
How did the results of the Holocaust play a major factor in how the map of the world would change?
How did the multitude of damages (social, political, economic, cultural) caused by WWII impact the geopolitical landscape throughout the world?
How do you think Harry felt about being separated from his parents at age 13?
How did he prepare for his journey?
What would you pack in your suitcase if you were going to leave your parents and know you might never see them again?
What is genocide?
What factors and circumstances caused the Holocaust and other genocide to happen?
What lessons can be derived from learning about genocide and how can you apply them to today’s world?
What nation had the highest gypsy population in 1939?
What region of Europe housed the largest gypsy population in 1939?
Using the estimate of 250,000 casualties, what percentage of the Gypsy population of Europe was killed?
