What regions of the world did the British take over?
How did Spain manage to go from the richest country in Eur ope to borrowing money?
What other major events/historical phenomena are happening at the time just before or after the document was created?
What is the argument or logic behind the document?
What factors and circumstances caused the Holocaust and other genocide to happen?
Why do you think Mussolini chose to write this when he did?
What role did violence play with the Dutch East India Company?
What did the authors mean by “deliberative assemblies” and “open discussion”?
Is it meant to be persuasive?
Why did fascist dictators see expansion from a territorial standpoint as a must in meeting theirgoals?
Highlight three excerpts in the passage that exemplify key characteristics of fascism. Identify which characteristics you chose. Shar e your excerpts and explanations with a partner. 2. How reliable is this source?
How did the positions of armed forces at the end of the warlead to zones of occupation and competition for politicalinﬂuence amongst the former Allies?
Why were Germany and Italy not as successful in setting up colonies overseas. 6. Why did Britain and France ﬁght many battles with each other?
Deliberative assemblies shall be widely established and all matters decided by open discussion. 2. All classes, high and low, shall be united in vigorously carrying out the administration of aﬀ airs of state. 3. The common people, no less than the civil and military oﬃcials, shall all be allowed to pursue their own calling so that there may be no discontent. 4. Evil customs of the past shall be broken oﬀ and everything based upon the just laws of Nature. 5. Knowledge shall be sought throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundation of imperial rule. Questions: 1. What do you think the people of Japan thought about this document?
Is the document biased?
What were the Gunpowder Empires and how did they compar e to their European and Asian counterparts?
Why was the Jewish population viewed assuch a threat to the Nazi Party?
(Image source: ?
What were some of the social and political problems that occurred as a result of Russia’s industrialization?
The man on the far left is W oodrow Wilson of the United States, seemingly trying to engage the others in conversation. Georges Clemenceau of France is holding the rope. David Lloyd George of Great Britain is holding a rolled up document, the Treaty of Versailles. A ﬁgure representing Germany is standing in front of the guillotine with his hands bound. • Thinking back to what you have lear ned about the end of World War I, what is signiﬁcant about the way each country is portrayed?
What are some examples of conﬂicts that gave way to emerging nations?
Dark blue are areas directly controlled by France. Light Blue are sister states that are greatly inﬂuenced by France. What political practices of Napoleon reﬂected those of a monarchy?
Using the estimate of 250,000 casualties, what percentage of the Gypsy population of Europe was killed?
Source: What changes were made by the Congress of Vienna?
What factors contributed to the growth of nation-states and the rise of nationalism?
List three important details from the cartoon. 2. What message is the cartoonist conveying?
How do bias and point of view impact sour ces?
How do you predict this declaration will aﬀect Middle Eastern political relations and boundaries in the coming decades?
Are there key pieces of evidence from the document that support your claim?
In what ways did Napoleon’s leadership contribute to Enlightened ideals ofrevolution?
What, if anything from western imperialism, do Asian communities borr ow and integrate into their own communities?
What does the chart tell you about the Mongols?
What factors led to the Armenian genocide, and what were its eﬀects?
How did Japan build itself into a world power in a short time?
How did the Chinese respond and resist Imperialism?
Why did India struggle with the idea of nationalism?
How did the policy of appeasement by Western democratic governments contribute to the beginning of World War II?
What lessons can be derived from learning about genocide and how can you apply them to today’s world?
Smallpox was the disease that caused the most deaths. Are there any pandemics today that could have the same eﬀect?
How did the silver from the Americas impact the Chinese economy?
The cartoon was originally published in 1930. What was happening in Germany and the world that would explain why the author chose to cr eate this cartoon?
How did the Spanish incorporate Incan ways into ruling its empir e in South America?
Source: Major_religious_groups 1. Where has Christianity spread thr oughout the world?
According to historians and Asian intellectuals, what reasons were given for Eur opean dominance over Asia?
How did the multitude of damages (social, political, economic,cultural) caused by WWII impact the geopolitical landscapethroughout the world?
How did a group of small countries (less than 5 percent of the world) claim the legal right to rule over more than 80 percent of the world?
At what point does the extent of nationalism become harmful to the people of the nation?
What regions of the world did Spain take over?
How did the events of Bloody Sunday mark a turning point for the Russian people?
Note that the cartoon was originally published in Britain. How does the country of origin a ﬀect the cartoon’s content?
What is “rule through and by the natives?
Does document 1 or 2 better corroborate the evidence pr ovided in document 3?
What key pieces of evidence from the document support your claim fr om above?
Economically, what enabled the Dutch East India Company to be successful?
Activity: After reading the articles below, write an essay/create a Venn Diagram that compares/contrasts the Opium War in China to what has happened in more modern times in Afghanistan. opium-heroin-taliban-helmand.html?
How did totalitarian regimes in the Soviet Union, Italy , Germany, and Japan come to power after WWI?
Imagine the thoughts of the Europeans as they ﬁrst saw land in the “New W orld.” What do you think would have been their most immediate impression?
The “catch-up” of the East 14. The boom of the oil-producing countries 15. Stop in the 1980s. What health setback occurred across the world in the early 80s?
What were the political and economic impacts of the Industrial Revolution?
How does the assassination impact that goal?
What policies, alliances, and actions contributed to the start ofWorld War II?
Afro-Eurasia: Africa and the Eurasian landmass, including o ﬀshore islands like Britain and Japan 2. The Americas: North, Central, and South America, plus oﬀshore islands like the Caribbean Islands 3. Australasia: Australia and the island of Papua New Guinea, plus neighboring islands in the Paciﬁc Ocean 4. The Paciﬁc: Island societies such as New Zealand, Micronesia, Melanesia, Hawaii (Antarctica is not considered a world zone because until very r ecently no people lived there.) This interactive, from the work of Dr. Phil Gersmehl, will help you visualize where ancient cities sprang up. As youturn on layers using the buttons, what connections do you see to thinks like average temperatures and the location of cities?
How did he prepare for his journey?
Can you delete the apps, and is the West in the process of doing so?
Does nationalism always precede revolution or is it sometimes an after - eﬀect?
How did the series of social reforms in the mid 1800s reﬂect Queen Victoria’s values?
How did the growth of nation-states in Europe diﬀer from that in the rest of the world?
In colonized areas, why might native princes and landowners have put up with European imperialism?
How did competition with the West modernize Japan?
What was the immediate impact of Gandhi’s message?
Ferdinand and his pregnant wife Sophie were killed by a gunman while in their car, ﬂeeing the city after a failed assassination attempt with a bomb earlier that day. The gunman was Gavrilo Princip, a 19-year-old 223Ethnic groups in the Balkans(Image source: Interactive 10.1 Multiple Perspectives Which argument do you ﬁnd the most compelling?
What role did the U.S. play in strengthening Latin American nationalism?
List three important details fr om the cartoon. 2. What message is the cartoon conveying?
How does this map reﬂect who beneﬁted from the Age of Exploration?
The nation was later named Haiti meaning in native language of Arawak, “mountainous land” by those on the island. Primary Source: Abbe Raynal Philosophical and Political History of the Settlements and Trade of the Europeans in the East and West Indies (1770) As you read the primary source, be ready to answer: For whom does the author call upon?
Each country in the world is a bubble. 2. The size of the bubbles represents the population size of the country. 3. The color represents the regions of the world. 4. The vertical axis is the average life span. 5. The horizontal axis is the income per person. 6. Look at the situation in 1800 - most countries are poor and have poor health. 7. Click play and see the progress from 1800 to today. 8. Take note of the income gaps - you can divide most countries into one of three groups: Low: under $2000 Middle: $2000-$20,000 High: over $20,000 9. Why are money and health related?
How did the policy of appeasement by Westerndemocratic governments contribute to thebeginning of World War II?
How did the policy of appeasement by Western democraticgovernments contribute to the beginning of World War II?
Why were European powers able to spread imperialism through Africa, the Middle East, and Asia so quickly?
How did the 16th century diﬀer from modern times?
What were other types of medieval punishments and/or tortures?
Napoleon. Does Napoleon deserve to be called great?
What were terms of Treaty of Nanjing?
Why did Europeans have to stick to the coast line until the late 19th Century?
Explain which app you think is most important to achieving the level of prosperity of the United States and other Western nations?
Portugal, realizing how much new land was lost, renegotiated the agreement to nearly 2,000 miles west of the Cape Verde islands which enabled Portuguese to claim present day Brazil. The Treaty of Tordesillas solved the problem by placing the Line of Demarcation that allowed the two Iberian nations to explore and lay claim to lands peacefully as Spain gained the rights to the Americas to build its empire and Portugal gained trading power in Africa and Asia. Continued Spanish Exploration Spain continued to explore the Americas and look for quicker r outes to the Spice Islands. Ponce de Leon explored the While the Caribbean was explored, Ferdinand Magellan left Spain in 1519 with 270 men. Magellan became the ﬁrst explorer to sail south of South America and into the Paciﬁc Ocean. By the time his ﬂeet completed the ﬁrst circumnavigational trip around the globe, Magellan died in battle and only eighteen of his crew remained. Colonial demarcation lines between Castile Spain and Portugal in the 15th and 16th Centuries. Source: / 400px-Spain_and_Portugal.png Questions for Map 1) What modern day country does Portugal maintain control of in the Americas?
What values did Queen Victoria represent and how did these values relate to economic reform?
Using what you know about the character of Joseph Stalin, do you think this was an easy speech to deliver . Give reasoning for your answer. How does this image contradict the earlier image of Hitler and Stalin?
What is John’s deﬁnition of the modern nation-state?
Could the Soviet Government have declined such a proposal?
How was China weakened by European inﬂuence?
How did the geography of the region dictate the r ole of slaves?
Germany declared war with Russia on August 1 and France two days later. The alliance system kicked in and declarations of war ensued from around the globe. The Great War had begun.The political cartoon above appeared in The Chicago Tribune in August 1914. What do you think the artist is trying to convey?
What were the causes, conﬂicts, and consequences of the American Revolution?
Which document best corroborates document 6?
What was trial by combat?
How did the Treaty of Versailles fail to meet Wilson’ s hope of a world safe for democracy?
According to this source what role do Mongol women have in Mongol society?
How did the Industrial Revolution shape thedistribution of global power?
Why did fascist dictators see expansion from a territorial standpoint as a must in meeting their goals?
How did worldwide economic depression shape the political landscape thr oughout Europe?
Is this source primary or secondary?
What region of Europe housed the largest gypsy population in 1939?
Replay from 1800 to today. Stop at 1950 and think about the following important changes: 12. Health improved everywhere (What were the important medical advances that happened around this time?
Were the circumstances that brought about nationalism in each of the countries in this chapter similar?
How does the cartoon’s message relate to German for eign policy in the 1930s?
By 1639, in order to gain control of foreign relations, the shogunate banned trade except at the port of Nagasaki with the Chinese and Dutch. Interactive 3.5 China/ Japan Comparison Complete the activity above then answer the questions below. Stop and Reﬂect Questions 1) How were China and Japan similar and diﬀerent with their r eactions to Europeans?
What exactly are they speaking about?
Is it signiﬁcant that the passage was written for an encyclopedia?
How and why did totalitarianism play out di ﬀerently in Italy, Germany, and the Soviet Union and how did this lead to the outbreak of WWII?
How and why did the Industrial Revolution cause shifts in population?
What is historically happening at the time the document was created?
What were some Parliamentary reforms in Britain between 1815-1848?
Based on this document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse o ﬀ without the Mongols?
What enabled European powers to advance and venture far across the sea and claim land?
Why does John emphasize that when we rely on studying historical texts, we should note the origin, particularly those of Eur opean writers?
Popes of the Middle Ages served as both religious and political leaders. “It is not without cause that we are driven to express in strong terms our amazement that you, accor ding to what we have heard, have invaded many countries belonging both to Christians and to others and are laying waste in a horrible desolation, and with a fury still unabated you do not cease from breaking the bonds of natural ties, sparing neither sex nor age, you rage against all indiscriminately with the sword of chastisement.” - Source: Pope Innocent IV, 1245 CE Document 1 Questions: 1. Is this source primary or secondary?
Are there key pieces of evidence from the document support your claim?
What was their reason/rationale for creating the document?
What two events rocked Japan and contributed to the crumbling of Tokugawa control in Japan?
How did the Dutch East India Company act as a nation?
How did Russia’s social structure and autocratic rule impact its economy?
Why might this letter from the Pope be considered by many as powerful?
Why were African slaves used primarily for for ced labor in the cotton and sugar plantations in the Americas?
Why is this document important 2. What is the reason behind the text?
The caption read “They salute with both hands now!” 1. What type of imagery does the artist use?
What regions of the world did the Dutch take over?
The Incas declined after the arrival of Pizarro. Spain plundered and looted its wealth, Catholicism took over as religion and the Spanish language overtook their language. Questions: 1. What caused the decline of the Aztecs?
Which document--1 or 2--seems to be the most reliable?
What relationship do you notice?
Does the sequencing of the download matter?
Based on document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse without the Mongols?
What were the Four Zones of the world and what geographic advantages did Afr o- Eurasia have over the rest of the world?
Were the revolutions that occurred in South America more similar to or diﬀerent than the American and French Revolutions?
How did the old social order demonstrate social inequities and how did thoseinequities contribute to the French Revolution?
What was the goal the rebel groups hoped to accomplish?
Which of the ﬁrst three documents best corroborates with document 4?
What were the political, cultural, and economic motives for imperialism in the 19th century?
What limitations does the author’s perspective provide for historians seeking information about Italy’ s invasion of Ethiopia?
What were the motives of European Exploration?
How did the inﬂux of silver hurt the Spanish economy?
How were indigenous peoples aﬀected by exploration?
Why was the Trans-Atlantic slave trade transformative to the economic way of lifein the Americas?
Which groups worked to assassinate the tsar?
How did African leaders respond and resist Imperialism?
How do you think the sultan of the Ottoman Empire felt about this document?
How do you think Harry felt about being separated from his parents at age 13?
How did native peoples respond and or resist imperialism?
What was the issue the rebel groups had with the tsar’s government?
Does nationalism always precede revolution or is it sometimes an after-eﬀect?
One of the more frustrating aspects of Versailles had been Italy’s failure to acquire any new colonies and Mussolini now intended to recreate the glories of the Roman Empire and achieve a ‘place in the sun’ to rival Britain and France. Further motives were the prospect of economic gains in the form of oil, coal and gold and of African recruits for the Italian army. Mussolini also thought of East Africa as a fertile area for Italian settlement, given the expected increase in population from the ‘Battle for Births’. Abyssinia was in any case the only remaining uncolonized African territory and seemed an easy target, given Italy’s military superiority and its presence in neighbouring Eritrea and Somaliland.” —Patricia Knight, 2003, excerpted from her book Mussolini and Fascism For each document: 1. What value does the author’s perspective provide for historians seeking information about Italy’ s invasion of Ethiopia?
What were some of the political, economic, and cultural ways of thinking that lead each of the countries in this chapter to adopt an extreme policy of nationalism?
What new forms of technology propelled the Industrial Revolution?
What is going on in the world at the time the document was created?
Beginning in 1603 and lasting over 250 years, what was the main government of Japan and what did it oﬀer?
Why do you think Stalin gave this speech?
How did the positions of armed forces at theend of the war lead to zones of occupation andcompetition for political inﬂuence amongst theformer Allies?
How did the positions of armed forces at the end of the war lead to zones of occupation andcompetition for political inﬂuence amongst theformer Allies?
What factors encourage exploration?
What is genocide?
What legislation/event/person caused the document to be created?
What would you pack in your suitcase if you were going to leave your parents and know you might never see them again?
What policies, alliances, and actionscontributed to the start of World War II?
Whose assassination leads to the path of revolution in Russia?
Why do people explore?
Which nation had the greatest impact on exploration and trade in Asia?
Is Morris Rossabi a reliable source?
Imagine what would happen if such a disease hit America?
How did the multitude of damages (social,political, economic, cultural) caused by WWIIimpact the geopolitical landscape throughoutthe world?
How would an Aztec viewpoint be diﬀerent?
What motivated Europeans to start colonies around the world?
What was the big game changer that allowed them to move into the interior of Africa?
In the 19th Century, Why did Europe have to use silver in trade with China?
Hypothesize why people in the Western Hemisphere got ill, wher eas it wasn’t the other way around?
What were the consequences of political and nationalistic revolutions?
Based on document, did the author believe the world would be better or worse o ﬀ without the Mongols?
What was trial by ﬁre?
How did the results of the Holocaust play amajor factor in how the map of the worldwould change?
What were the long term consequences of his message?
Why was the Jewish population viewed as such a threat to theNazi Party?
What steps did a newly-throned Emperor Meiji and his leadership implement in order to unify Japan?
What were some of the biggest reforms in British politics under Benjamin Disraeli?
How does the portrayal of Hitler and the men next to him di ﬀer from the portrayal of the men in the crowd?
This book serves as a record for Mongol and Asian history. “At every opportunity, he (the son of Genghis Khan) allowed his sublime thoughts to overﬂow lavishly into the most just and charitable of good deeds, into the eradication of injustice and enmity, into the development of cities and districts, as well as into the construction of various buildings. He never neglected any measure designed to strengthen the framework of peace, and to lay the foundation of prosperity. “ - Source: Rashid Al-Din, 1241 CE Document 2 Questions: 1. Is this source primary or secondary?
How did African slavery in the New World di ﬀer fundamentally from past instances of slavery and other systems of labor in the same era?
What is the attitude of the author to their subject?
What is a primary source?
How did political unrest increase after the Revolution of 1905?
How is public education often seen as as part of a nationalizing project?
How did the multitude of damages (social,political, economic, cultural) caused by WWIIimpact the geopolitical landscape throughout the world?
Did the beneﬁts of Napoleon’s political, social, and economic policies outweigh thecosts of the French Revolution?
What did the Europeans ﬁnd that the Chinese could not refuse and thus upset the balance of trade (The balance of trade (BOT) is the diﬀerence between a country's imports and its exports for a given time period) in the Europeans favor?
What was trial by water?
To prevent conﬂict between Spain and Portugal, the Catholic Pope did what?
What warrior class was an odd feature of the Tokugawa era?
How does Cortes describe noche triste?
The British ﬂeet now was able to cut oﬀ supplies to Napoleon and his troops. Meanwhile, the British encouraged the Ottoman Empire to declare war on France. Napoleon led his army to Jaﬀa to prevent the Ottomans from entering Egypt. Short on supplies and unable to support the prisoners he took, Napoleon ordered the prisoners to be executed. At the same time, many of his men fell ill to the plague. The French moved onto the fortress of Acre when word arrived that France was in trouble under control of the Directory. Napoleon opted to return to France. Napoleon Takes Power Upon his return to France, two of the ﬁve directors had a conspiracy to overthrow the Directory and create a more stable government. They needed the military behind them and selected Napoleon. On November 9, 1799, they staged a coup d’état, or blow to the state, and rid of the Directory. A new constitution was written and set up the three member Consulate to replace the Directory. Napoleon became ﬁrst consul which had greater power than the other two and essentially controlled France. Interactive 5.11 Napoleon Timeline How did Napoleon build up his reputation as a national hero?
How did the Industrial Revolution change society?
If you were a Jewish person living in an Allied nation (such as Russia or the United States), would this declaration aﬀect your perception of the war eﬀort?
How did the results of the Holocaust play a major factor in how the map of the worldwould change?
The group of readers to whom this document is directed. 2. The audience may be one person, a small group, or a large group; it may be a certain person or a certain people. 3. How might the intended audience aﬀect the reliability of the document?
How did the results of the Holocaust play a major factor in howthe map of the world would change?
How does evidence support or refute ar guments?
Can China do without app #3 (property rights)?
What other factors ﬁnally made it possible for Europeans to colonize Asia?
What conclusions can you make based on wher e protestantism and catholicism spread throughout the world?
In what ways did the League of Nations fail to halt political and military aggr ession?
How did Middle Eastern leaders respond and resist Imperialism?
How many Indigenous people were alive in the Western Hemispher e in 1520 compared to 1550?
Note the caption. How does it expand your understanding of the cartoon?
What year had the lowest population of Indigenous people?
What nation had the highest gypsy population in 1939?
